Title: Representation Theory, Part 3: Products of Representations
Date: 2015-01-05 13:37
Tags: representation theory
Slug: rt3
Status: published
original_url: 2015/01/05/represenation-theory-part-3-products-of-representations/

Happy New Year to all! A quick reminder that $2015 = 5 \cdot 13 \cdot 31$.

This post will set the stage by examining products of two representations.
In particular, I'll characterize all the irreducibles of $G_1 \times G_2$ in
terms of those for $G_1$ and $G_2$.
This will set the stage for our discussion of the finite regular representation in Part 4.

In what follows $k$ is an algebraically closed field, $G$ is a finite group,
and the characteristic of $k$ does not divide $\left\lvert G \right\rvert$.

## 1. Products of representations

First, I need to tell you how to take the product of two representations.

> **Definition.** Let $G_1$ and $G_2$ be groups.
> Given a $G_1$ representation $\rho_1 = (V_1, \cdot_{\rho_1})$ and a $G_2$
> representation $\rho_2 = (V_2, \cdot_{\rho_2})$, we define
>
> $$\rho_1 \boxtimes \rho_2 \coloneqq \left( V_1 \otimes V_2, \cdot \right)$$
>
> as a representation of $G_1 \times G_2$ on $V_1 \otimes V_2$. The action is given by
>
> $$
> (g_1, g_2) \cdot (v_1 \otimes v_2) = \left( g_1 \cdot_{\rho_1} v_1 \right)
> \otimes (g_2 \cdot_{\rho_2} v_2).
> $$

In the special case $G_1 = G_2 = G$,
we can also restrict $\rho_1 \boxtimes \rho_2$ to a representation of $G$.
Note that we can interpret $G$ itself as a subgroup of $G \times G$ by just looking along the diagonal:
there's an obvious isomorphism
$$G \sim \left\{ (g,g) \mid g \in G \right\}.$$
So, let me set up the general definition.

> **Definition.** Let $\mathcal G$ be a group, and let $\mathcal H$ be a subgroup of $\mathcal G$.
> Then for any representation $\rho = (V, \cdot_\rho)$ of $\mathcal G$, we let
>
> $$\operatorname{Res}^{\mathcal G}_{\mathcal H} (\rho)$$
>
> denote the representation of $\mathcal H$ on $V$ by the same action.

This notation might look intimidating, but it's not really saying anything,
and I include the notation just to be pedantic.
All we're doing is taking a representation and restricting which elements of the group are acting on it.

We now apply this to get $\rho_1 \otimes \rho_2$ out of $\rho_1 \boxtimes \rho_2$.

> **Definition.** Let $\rho_1 = (V_1, \cdot_{\rho_1})$ and
> $\rho_2 = (V_2, \cdot_{\rho_2})$ be representations of $G$. Then we define
>
> $$
> \rho_1 \otimes \rho_2 \coloneqq \operatorname{Res}^{G \times G}_G
> \left( \rho_1 \boxtimes \rho_2 \right)
> $$
>
> meaning $\rho_1 \otimes \rho_2$ has vector space $V_1 \otimes V_2$ and action
> $g \cdot (v_1 \otimes v_2) = (g \cdot_{\rho_1} v_1) \otimes (g \cdot_{\rho_2} v_2)$.

This tensor product obeys some nice properties, for example the following.

> **Lemma 1.** Given representations $\rho$, $\rho_1$, $\rho_2$ we have
>
> $$
> \rho \otimes \left( \rho_1 \oplus \rho_2 \right) \simeq \left( \rho \otimes
> \rho_1 \right) \oplus \left( \rho \otimes \rho_2 \right).
> $$

_Proof:_ There's an obvious isomorphism between the underlying vector spaces,
and that isomorphism respects the action of $G$. $\Box$

To summarize all the above, here is a table of the representations we've seen, in the order we met them.

$$
\begin{array}{|l|lll|} \hline \text{Representation} & \text{Group} &
\text{Space} & \text{Action} \\ \hline \rho & V & G & g \cdot_\rho v \\
\operatorname{Fun}(X) & G & \operatorname{Fun}(X) & (g \cdot f)(x) = f(g^{-1} \cdot x) \\
\text{triv}_G & G & k & g \cdot a = a \\ \rho_1 \oplus \rho_2 & G & V_1 \oplus
V_2 & g \cdot (v_1 + v_2) = (g \cdot_{\rho_1} v_1) + (g \cdot_{\rho_2} v_2) \\
\rho_1 \boxtimes \rho_2 & G_1 \times G_2 & V_1 \otimes V_2 & (g_1,
g_2) \cdot (v_1 \otimes v_2) \\ &&& = (g_1 \cdot_{\rho_1} v_1) \otimes (g_2
\cdot_{\rho_2} v_2) \\ \text{Res}^G_H(\rho) & H & V & h \cdot v = h \cdot_\rho
v\\ \rho_1 \otimes \rho_2 & G & V_1 \otimes V_2 & g \cdot (v_1 \otimes v_2) = (g
\cdot_{\rho_1} v_1) \otimes (g \cdot_{\rho_2} v_2) \\ \hline \end{array}
$$

## 2. Revisiting Schur and Maschke

Defining a tensor product of representations gives us another way to express $\rho^{\oplus n}$, as follows.
By an abuse of notation, given a vector space $k^m$ we can define an associated
$G$-representation $k^m = (k^m, \cdot_{k^m})$ on it by the trivial action, i.e.
$g \cdot_{k^m} v = v$ for $v \in k^m$. A special case of this is using $k$ to represent $\text{triv}_G$.
With this abuse of notation, we have the following lemma.

> **Lemma 2.** Let $M$ be an $m$-dimensional vector space over $k$.
> Then $\rho^{\oplus m} \simeq \rho \otimes M$.

_Proof:_ It reduces to checking that
$\rho \otimes k \coloneqq \rho \otimes \text{triv}_G$ is isomorphic to $\rho$, which is evident.
We can then proceed by induction:
$\rho \otimes (k \oplus k^{t-1}) \simeq (\rho \otimes k) \oplus (\rho \otimes k^{t-1})$. $\Box$

So, we can actually rewrite Maschke's and Schur's Theorem as one. Instead of

$$
\rho \simeq \bigoplus_\alpha \rho_\alpha^{\oplus n_\alpha}
\quad\text{where}\quad n_\alpha = \dim \operatorname{Hom}_G(\rho, \rho_\alpha)
$$

we now have instead
$$\bigoplus_\alpha \rho_\alpha \otimes \operatorname{Hom}_G(\rho, \rho_\alpha) \simeq \rho.$$
Now we're going to explicitly write down the isomorphism between these maps.
It suffices to write down the isomorphism
$\rho_\alpha \otimes \operatorname{Hom}_G(\rho, \rho_\alpha) \rightarrow \rho_\alpha^{\oplus n_\alpha}$,
and then take the sum over each of the $\alpha$'s. But

$$
\operatorname{Hom}_G(\rho, \rho_\alpha) \simeq \operatorname{Hom}_G(\rho_\alpha^{\oplus n_\alpha},
\rho_\alpha) \simeq \operatorname{Hom}_G(\rho_\alpha, \rho_\alpha)^{\oplus n_\alpha}.
$$

So to write the isomorphism $\rho_\alpha \otimes \operatorname{Hom}_G(\rho_\alpha, \rho_\alpha)^{\oplus n_\alpha} \rightarrow
\rho_\alpha^{\oplus n_\alpha}$, we just have to write down the isomorphism $\rho_\alpha \otimes \operatorname{Hom}_G(\rho_\alpha,
\rho_\alpha) \rightarrow \rho_\alpha$,

Schur's Lemma tells us that $\operatorname{Hom}_G(\rho_\alpha, \rho_\alpha) \simeq k$; i.e.
every $\xi \in \operatorname{Hom}_G(\rho_\alpha, \rho_\alpha)$ just corresponds to
multiplying $v$ by some constant. So this case is easy: the map
$$v \otimes \xi \mapsto \xi(v)$$
works nicely. And since all we've done is break over a bunch of direct sums,
the isomorphism propagates all the way up, resulting in the following theorem.

> **Theorem 3 (Maschke and Schur).** For any finite-dimensional $\rho$,
> the homomorphism of $G$ representations
>
> $$\bigoplus_\alpha \rho_\alpha \otimes \operatorname{Hom}_G(\rho, \rho_\alpha) \rightarrow \rho$$
>
> given by sending every simple tensor via
>
> $$v \otimes \xi \mapsto \xi(v)$$
>
> is an isomorphism.

Note that it's much easier to write the map from left to right than vice-versa,
even though the inverse map does exist (since it's an isomorphism).
(Tip: as a general rule of thumb, always map _out_ of the direct sum.)

## 3. Characterizing the $G_1 \times G_2$ irreducibles

Now we are in a position to state the main theorem for this post,
which shows that the irreducibles we defined above are very well behaved.

> **Theorem 4.** Let $G_1$ and $G_2$ be finite groups.
> Then a finite-dimensional representation $\rho$ of $G_1 \times G_2$ is
> irreducible if and only if it is of the form
>
> $$\rho_1 \boxtimes \rho_2$$
>
> where $\rho_1$ and $\rho_2$ are irreducible representations of $G_1$ and $G_2$, respectively.

_Proof:_ First, suppose $\rho = (V, \cdot_\rho)$ is an irreducible representation of $G_1 \times G_2$. Set
$$\rho^1 \coloneqq \operatorname{Res}^{G_1 \times G_2}_{G_1} (\rho).$$
Then by Maschke's Theorem, we may write $\rho^1$ as a direct sum of the irreducibles
$$\bigoplus_\alpha \rho_\alpha^1 \otimes \operatorname{Hom}_{G_1} (\rho_\alpha^1, \rho^1) \simeq \rho^1$$
with the map $v \otimes \xi \mapsto \xi(v)$ being the isomorphism.
Now we can put a $G_2$ representation structure on $\operatorname{Hom}_{G_1} (\rho_\alpha^1, \rho^1)$ by
$$(g_2 \cdot f)(g) = g_2 \cdot_{\rho} (f(g)).$$
It is easy to check that this is indeed a $G_2$ representation.
Thus it makes sense to talk about the $G_1 \times G_2$ representation
$$\bigoplus_\alpha \rho_\alpha^1 \boxtimes \operatorname{Hom}_{G_1} (\rho_\alpha^1, \rho^1).$$
We claim that the isomorphism for $\rho^1$ as a $G_1$ representation now lifts
to an isomorphism of $G_1 \times G_2$ representations. That is, we claim that
$$\bigoplus_\alpha \rho_\alpha^1 \boxtimes \operatorname{Hom}_{G_1} (\rho_\alpha^1, \rho^1) \simeq \rho$$
by the same isomorphism as for $\rho^1$.
To see this, we only have to check that the isomorphism
$v \otimes \xi \mapsto \xi(v)$ commutes with the action of $g_2 \in G_2$.
But this is obvious, since $g_2 \cdot (v \otimes \xi) = v \otimes (g_2 \cdot \xi) \mapsto (g_2 \cdot \xi)(v)$.

Thus the isomorphism holds. But $\rho$ is irreducible, so there can only be one nontrivial summand.
Thus we derive the required decomposition of $\rho$.

Now for the other direction: take $\rho_1$ and $\rho_2$ irreducible.
Suppose $\rho_1 \boxtimes \rho_2$ has a nontrivial subrepresentation of the form $\rho_1' \boxtimes \rho_2'$.
Viewing as $G_1$ representation, we find that $\rho_1'$ is a nontrivial subrepresentation of $\rho_1$,
and similarly for $\rho_2$. But $\rho_1$ is irreducible, hence $\rho_1' \simeq \rho_1$.
Similarly $\rho_2' \simeq \rho_2$. So in fact $\rho_1' \boxtimes \rho_2' \simeq \rho_1 \boxtimes \rho_2$.
Hence we conclude $\rho_1 \boxtimes \rho_2$ is irreducible. $\Box$

## 4. Conclusion

In particular, this means that any representation $\rho$ of $G \times G$ decomposes as
$$\rho \simeq \bigoplus_{\alpha, \beta} \rho_\alpha \boxtimes \rho_\beta$$
and we even have
$$\operatorname{Res}_{G}^{G\times G} \rho \simeq \bigoplus_{\alpha, \beta} \rho_\alpha \otimes \rho_\beta.$$
In the next post I'll invoke this on the so-called finite regular representation
to get the elegant results I promised at the end of Part 2.

_Thanks to Dennis Gaitsgory, who taught me this in his course Math 55a.
My notes for Math 55a can be found at [my website](http://www.mit.edu/~evanchen/coursework.html)._
