---
title: von Mangoldt and Zeta
date: 2015-05-25 13:37
slug: zeta-1
tags:
original_url: 2015/05/25/von-mangoldt-and-zeta/
status: published
---

Prerequisites for this post: [definition of Dirichlet
convolution](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dirichlet_convolution), and big $O$-notation.

Normally I don't like to blog about something until I'm pretty confident that I
have a reasonably good understanding of what's happening, but I desperately need to sort out my thoughts,
so here I go…

## 1. Primes

One day, an alien explorer lands on Earth in a 3rd grade classroom.
He hears the teacher talk about these things called primes.
So he goes up to the teacher and asks "how many primes are there less than $x$?".

Answer: "uh. . .".

Maybe that's too hard, so the alien instead asks "_about_ how many primes are there less than $x$?".

This is again greeted with silence.
Confused, the alien asks a bunch of the teachers, who all respond similarly,
but then someone mentions that in the last couple hundred years,
someone was able to show with a lot of effort that the answer was pretty close to
$$\approx \frac{x}{\log x}.$$
The alien, now more satisfied, then says "okay, great! How good is this estimate?"

More silence.

## 2. The von Mangoldt function

The prime counting function isn't very nice, but there is a related function that's a lot more well-behaved.
We define the **von Mangoldt** function $\Lambda$ by
$$\Lambda(x) = \begin{cases} \log p & x = p^k \text{ for some prime } p \\ 0 & \text{otherwise}. \end{cases}$$
It's worth remarking that in terms of [(Dirichlet)
convolution](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dirichlet_convolution), we have
$$\mathbf 1 \ast \Lambda = \log$$
(here $\mathbf 1$ is the constant function that gives $\mathbf 1(n) = 1$).
(Do you see why?) Then, we define the **second Chebyshev function** as
$$\psi(x) = \sum_{n \le x} \Lambda(n).$$
In words, $\psi(x)$ adds up logs of prime powers; in still other words, it is the _partial sums of $\Lambda$_.

It turns out that knowing $\psi(x)$ well gives us information about the number of primes less than $x$,
and vice versa. (This is actually not hard to show;
try it yourself if you like.) But we like the function $\psi$ because it is more well-behaved.
In particular, it turns out the answer to the alien's question "there are about
$\frac{x}{\log x}$ primes less than $x$" is equivalent to "$\psi(x) \approx x$".

So to satisfy the alien, we have to establish $\psi(x) \approx x$ and tell him how good this estimate is.

Actually, what we _believe_ to be true is:

> **Theorem 1** **(Riemann Hypothesis)**
>
> We conjecture that
> $$\psi(x) = x + O\left( x^{\frac{1}{2}+\varepsilon} \right)$$
> for any $\varepsilon > 0$.

Unfortunately, what we actually know is far from this:

> **Theorem 2** **(Prime Number Theorem, Classical Form)**
>
> We have proved that
> $$\psi(x) = x + O\left( x e^{-c\sqrt{\log x}} \right)$$
> for some constant $c$ (actually we have done slightly better, but not much).

You will notice that this error term is greater than $O(x^{0.999})$,
and this is true even of the more modern estimates. In other words, we have a _long_ way to go.

## 3. Dirichlet Series and Perron's Formula

Note: I'm ignoring issues of convergence in this section, and will continue to do so for this post.

First, some vocabulary. An **arithmetic function** is just a function $\mathbb N \rightarrow \mathbb C$.

> **Example 3.** Functions $\Lambda$, $\mathbf 1$, or $\log$ are arithmetic functions.

The **partial sums** of an arithmetic function are sums like $f(1) + f(2) + \dots + f(n)$,
or better yet $\sum_{n \le x} f(n)$.

> **Example 4.** The Chebyshev function $\psi$ gives the partial sums of $\Lambda$, by definition.

<p></p>

> **Example 5.** The floor function $\left\lfloor x \right\rfloor$ gives the partial sums of $\mathbf 1$:
> $$\left\lfloor x \right\rfloor = \sum_{n \le x} 1 = \sum_{n \le x} \mathbf 1(n).$$

Back to the main point. We are scared of the word "prime",
so in estimating $\psi(x)$ we want to avoid doing so by any means possible.
In light of this we introduce the **Dirichlet series** for an arithmetic function $f$, which is defined as
$$F(s) = \sum_{n \ge 1} f(n) n^{-s}$$
for complex numbers $s$. This is like a generating function, except rather than $x^n$'s we have $n^{-s}$'s.

Why Dirichlet series over generating functions?
There are two reasons why this turns out to be a really good move.
The first is that in number theory, we often have convolutions, which play well with Dirichlet series:

> **Theorem 6** **(Convolution of Dirichlet Series)**
>
> Let $f, g, h : \mathbb N \rightarrow \mathbb C$ be arithmetic functions and let $F$, $G$,
> $H$ be the corresponding Dirichlet series. Then
> $$f = g \ast h \implies F = G \cdot H.$$
> (Here $\ast$ is the Dirichlet convolution.)

This is actually immediate if you just multiply it out!

We want to use this to get a handle on the Dirichlet series for $\Lambda$. As remarked earlier, we have
$$\log = \mathbf 1 \ast \Lambda.$$
The Dirichlet series of $\mathbf 1$ has a name; it is the infamous **Riemann zeta function**, given by
$$\zeta(s) = \sum_{n \ge 1} n^{-s}.$$
What about $\log$? Answer: it's just $-\zeta'(s)$!
This follows by term-wise differentiation of the sum $\zeta$,
since the derivative of $n^{-s}$ is $-\log n \cdot n^{-s}$.

Thus we have deduced

> **Theorem 7** **(Dirichlet Series of von Mangoldt)**
>
> We have
> $$-\frac{\zeta'(s)}{\zeta(s)} = \sum_{n \ge 1} \Lambda(n) \cdot n^{-s}.$$

That was fun. Why do we care, though?

I promised a second reason, and here it is: Surprisingly,
complex analysis gives us a way to link the Dirichlet series of a function with
its partial sums (in this case, $\psi$).
It is the so-called [Link](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Perron's_formula)**Perron's Formula**},
which links partial sums to Dirichlet series:

> **Theorem 8** **(Perron's Formula)**
>
> Let $f : \mathbb N \rightarrow \mathbb C$ be a function, $F$ its Dirichlet series.
> Then for any $x$ not an integer,
> $$\sum_{n \le x} f(n) = \frac{1}{2\pi i} \int_{c-i\infty}^{c+i\infty} F(s) \cdot \frac{x^s}{s} ds$$
> for any large enough $c$ (large enough to avoid convergence issues).

Applied here this tells us that if $x$ is not an integer we have

$$
\psi(x) \coloneqq \sum_{n \le x} \Lambda(n) = \frac{1}{2\pi i}
\int_{c-i\infty}^{c+i\infty} -\frac{\zeta'(s)}{\zeta(s)} \cdot \frac{x^s}{s} ds.
$$

for any $c > 1$.

This is fantastic, because we've managed to get rid of the sigma sign and the
word "prime" from the entire problem: all we have to do is study the integral on the right-hand side. Right?

Ha, if it were that easy. That $\zeta$ function is a strange beast.

## 4. The Riemann Zeta Function

Here's the initial definition:
$$\zeta(s) = \sum_{n \ge 1} n^{-s}$$
is the Dirichlet series of the constant function $\mathbf 1$.
Unfortunately, this sum only converges when the real part of $s$ is greater than $1$.
(For $s=1$, it is the standard harmonic series, which explodes.)

However, we can use something called
**[Abel summation](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abel's_summation_formula)**,
which transforms a Dirichlet series into an integral of its partial sums.

> **Theorem 9** **(Abel Summation for Dirichlet Series)**
>
> If $f$ is an arithmetic function and $F$ is its Dirichlet series then
> $$F(s) = s \int_1^{\infty} \frac{\sum_{n \le x} f(n)}{x^{s+1}} dx.$$

It's the opposite of Perron's Formula earlier,
which we used to transform partial sums into integrals in terms of the Dirichlet series.
Unlike $\Lambda$, whose partial sums became the very beast $\psi$ we were trying to tame,
the partial sums of $\mathbf 1$ are very easy to understand:
$$\sum_{n \le x} \mathbf 1(n) = \sum_{n \le x} 1 = \left\lfloor x \right\rfloor.$$
It's about as nice as can be!

Applying this to the Riemann zeta function and doing some calculation, we find that
$$\zeta(s) = \frac{s}{s-1} - s \int_1^\infty \frac{ \left\{ x \right\} }{x^{s+1}} dx$$
where $\left\{ x \right\}$ is the fractional part.
It turns out that other than the explosion at $s=1$,
this function will converge for any $s$ whose real part is $> 0$.
So this extends the Riemann zeta function to a function on half of the complex plane, minus a point (i.e.
is a [meromorphic function](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Meromorphic_function) with a single pole at $s=1$).

## 5. Zeros of the Zeta Function

Right now I've only told you how to define $\zeta(s)$ for $\operatorname{Re} s > 0$.
In the next post I'll outline how to push this even further to get the rest of the zeta function.

You might already be aware that the behavior of $\zeta$ for
$0 < \operatorname{Re} s < 1$ has a [large prize attached to
it](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Riemann_hypothesis). For now, I'll mention that

> **Theorem 10.** If $\operatorname{Re} s \ge 1$, then $\zeta(s) \neq 0$.

_Proof:_ Let $s = \sigma + it$ be the real/imaginary parts (these letters are due to tradition).
For $\sigma > 1$, we use the fact that we have an infinite product

$$
\zeta(s) = \prod_{p \text{ prime}} \left( 1+p^s+(p^2)^s + \dots \right) =
\prod_{p \text{ prime}} \frac{1}{1-p^{-s}}.
$$

Using the fact that $\sum_p \left\lvert p^{-s} \right\rvert < \sum_p p^{-\sigma} < \sum_{n \ge 1} n^{-\sigma}
< \infty$, $\prod_p (1-p^{-s})$, converges to some finite value, say $L$. By standard facts on infinite products
(for example, [Appendix A.2](http://www.math.uiuc.edu/~hildebr/ant/) here) that
means $\zeta(s)$ is $1/L \neq 0$.

The situation for $\sigma = 1$ is trickier. We use the following trick:
$$3 + 4\cos\theta + \cos2\theta = 2(\cos\theta+1)^2 \ge 0 \quad \forall \theta.$$
Now,
$$\log\zeta(s) = \sum_p -\log(1-p^{-s}) = \sum_p \sum_{n \ge 1} \frac{p^{-sn}}{n}$$
for all $\sigma > 1$. By looking term-by-term at the real parts and using the 3-4-1 inequality we obtain

$$
3\operatorname{Re} \log\zeta(\sigma) + 4\operatorname{Re} \log\zeta(\sigma+it) +
\operatorname{Re} \log\zeta(\sigma+2it) \ge 0 \qquad \sigma > 1.
$$

Thus
$$\left\lvert \zeta(\sigma)^3\zeta(\sigma+it)^4\zeta(\sigma+2it) \right\rvert \ge 1.$$
Now suppose $1+it$ was a zero ($t \neq 0$); let $\sigma \rightarrow 1^+$.
Then we get a simple pole at $\zeta(1)$, repeated three times.
However, we get a zero at $\zeta(1+it)$, repeated four times.
There is no pole at $\zeta(1+2it)$, so the left-hand side is going to drop to zero, impossible.
(The key point is the deep inequality $4 > 3$.) $\Box$

Next up: prime number theorem.
References: [Kedlaya's 18.785 notes](http://ocw.mit.edu/courses/mathematics/18-785-analytic-number-theory-spring-2007/)
and [Hildebrand's ANT notes](http://www.math.uiuc.edu/~hildebr/ant/).
