---
title: Uniqueness of solutions for diffeq's
date: 2015-12-17 13:37
slug: diffeq
tags: analysis
original_url: 2015/12/17/uniqueness-of-solutions-for-diffeqs/
status: published
---

Let $V$ be a normed finite-dimensional real vector space and let $U \subseteq V$ be an open set.
A **vector field** on $U$ is a function $\xi : U \rightarrow V$.
(In the words of Gaitsgory: "you should imagine a vector field as a domain,
and at every point there is a little vector growing out of it.")

The idea of a differential equation is as follows.
Imagine your vector field specifies a _velocity_ at each point.
So you initially place a particle somewhere in $U$, and then let it move freely,
guided by the arrows in the vector field.
(There are plenty of good pictures
[online](https://www.google.com/search?hl=en&q=vector+field+differential+equation).) Intuitively,
**for nice $\xi$ it should be the case that the trajectory resulting is unique.** This is the main take-away;
the proof itself is just for completeness.

This is a so-called differential equation:

> **Definition 1.** Let $\gamma : (-\varepsilon, \varepsilon) \rightarrow U$ be a continuous path.
> We say $\gamma$ is a **solution to the differential equation defined by
> $\xi$** if for each $t \in (-\varepsilon, \varepsilon)$ we have
> $$\gamma'(t) = \xi(\gamma(t)).$$

> **Example 2** **(Examples of DE's)**
>
> Let $U = V = \mathbb R$.
>
> 1.  Consider the vector field $\xi(x) = 1$. Then the solutions $\gamma$ are just $\gamma(t) = t+c$.
> 2.  Consider the vector field $\xi(x) = x$.
>     Then $\gamma$ is a solution exactly when $\gamma'(t) = \gamma(t)$.
>     It's well-known that $\gamma(t) = c\exp(t)$.

Of course, you may be used to seeing differential equations which are _time-dependent_: i.e.
something like $\gamma'(t) = t$, for example.
In fact, you can hack this to fit in the current model using the idea that time is itself just a dimension.
Suppose we want to model $\gamma'(t) = F(\gamma(t), t)$. Then we instead consider
$$\xi : V \times \mathbb R \rightarrow V \times \mathbb R \qquad\text{by}\qquad \xi(v, t) = (F(v,t), 1)$$
and solve the resulting differential equation over $V \times \mathbb R$. This does exactly what we want.
Geometrically, this means making time into another dimension and imagining that
our particle moves at a "constant speed through time".

The task is then mainly about finding which conditions guarantee that our
differential equation behaves nicely. The answer turns out to be:

> **Definition 3.** The vector field $\xi : U \rightarrow V$ satisfies the **Lipschitz condition** if
> $$\left\lVert \xi(x')-\xi(x") \right\rVert \le \Lambda \left\lVert x'-x" \right\rVert$$
> holds identically for some fixed constant $\Lambda$.

Note that continuously differentiable implies Lipschitz.

> **Theorem 4** **(Picard-Lindelöf)**
>
> Let $V$ be a finite-dimensional real vector space,
> and let $\xi$ be a vector field on a domain $U \subseteq V$ which satisfies the Lipschitz condition.
>
> Then for every $x_0 \in U$ there exists $(-\varepsilon,\varepsilon)$ and
> $\gamma : (-\varepsilon,\varepsilon) \rightarrow U$ such that
> $\gamma'(t) = \xi(\gamma(t))$ and $\gamma(0) = x_0$.
> Moreover, if $\gamma_1$ and $\gamma_2$ are two solutions and $\gamma_1(t) = \gamma_2(t)$ for some $t$,
> then $\gamma_1 = \gamma_2$.

In fact, Peano's existence theorem says that if we replace Lipschitz continuity with just continuity,
then $\gamma$ exists but need not be unique. For example:

> **Example 5** **(Counterexample if $\xi$ is not differentiable)**
>
> Let $U = V = \mathbb R$ and consider $\xi(x) = x^{\frac23}$, with $x_0 = 0$.
> Then $\gamma(t) = 0$ and $\gamma(t) = \left( t/3 \right)^3$ are both solutions to the differential equation
> $$\gamma'(t) = \gamma(t)^{\frac 23}.$$

Now, for the proof of the main theorem.
The main idea is the following result (sometimes called the contraction principle).

> **Lemma 6** **(Banach Fixed-Point Theorem)**
>
> Let $(X,d)$ be a complete metric space.
> Let $f : X \rightarrow X$ be a map such that
> $d(f(x_1), f(x_2)) < \frac{1}{2} d(x_1, x_2)$ for any $x_1, x_2 \in X$. Then $f$ has a _unique_ fixed point.

For the proof of the main theorem, we are given $x_0 \in V$.
Let $X$ be the metric space of continuous functions from
$(-\varepsilon, \varepsilon)$ to the complete metric space
$\overline{B}(x_0, r)$ which is the closed ball of radius $r$ centered at $x_0$.
(Here $r > 0$ can be arbitrary,
so long as it stays in $U$.) It turns out that $X$ is itself a complete metric
space when equipped with the **sup norm**
$$d(f, g) = \sup_{t \in (-\varepsilon, \varepsilon)} \left\lVert f(t)-g(t) \right\rVert.$$
This is well-defined since $\overline{B}(x_0, r)$ is compact.

We wish to use the Banach theorem on $X$,
so we'll rig a function $\Phi : X \rightarrow X$ with the property that its
fixed points are solutions to the differential equation. Define it by, for every $\gamma \in X$,
$$\Phi(\gamma) : t \mapsto x_0 + \int_0^t \xi(\gamma(s)) ds.$$
This function is contrived so that $(\Phi\gamma)(0) = x_0$ and $\Phi\gamma$ is
both continuous and differentiable. By the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, the derivative is exhibited by
$$(\Phi\gamma)'(t) = \left( \int_0^t \xi(\gamma(s)) ds \right)' = \xi(\gamma(t)).$$
In particular, fixed points correspond exactly to solutions to our differential equation.

A priori this output has signature $\Phi\gamma : (-\varepsilon,\varepsilon) \rightarrow V$,
so we need to check that $\Phi\gamma(t) \in \overline{B}(x_0, r)$. We can check that

$$
\begin{aligned} \left\lVert (\Phi\gamma)(t) - x_0 \right\rVert &=\left\lVert
\int_0^t \xi(\gamma(s)) ds \right\rVert \\ &\le \int_0^t \left\lVert
\xi(\gamma(s)) ds \right\rVert \\ &\le t \max_{s \in [0,t]} \left\lVert
\xi\gamma(s) \right\rVert \\ &< \varepsilon \cdot A \end{aligned}
$$

where $A = \max_{x \in \overline{B}(x_0,r)} \left\lVert \xi(x) \right\rVert$;
we have $A < \infty$ since $\overline{B}(x_0,r)$ is compact.
Hence by selecting $\varepsilon < r/A$, the above is bounded by $r$,
so $\Phi\gamma$ indeed maps into $\overline{B}(x_0, r)$.
(Note that at this point we have not used the Lipschitz condition, only that $\xi$ is continuous.)

It remains to show that $\Phi$ is contracting. Write

$$
\begin{aligned} \left\lVert (\Phi\gamma_1)(t) - (\Phi\gamma_2)(t) \right\rVert
&= \left\lVert \int_{s \in [0,t]} \left( \xi(\gamma_1(s))-\xi(\gamma_2(s))
\right) \right\rVert \\ &= \int_{s \in [0,t]} \left\lVert
\xi(\gamma_1(s))-\xi(\gamma_2(s)) \right\rVert \\ &\le t\Lambda \sup_{s \in
[0,t]} \left\lVert \gamma_1(s)-\gamma_2(s) \right\rVert \\ &< \varepsilon\Lambda
\sup_{s \in [0,t]} \left\lVert \gamma_1(s)-\gamma_2(s) \right\rVert \\ &= \varepsilon\Lambda d(\gamma_1,
\gamma_2) . \end{aligned}
$$

Hence once again for $\varepsilon$ sufficiently small we get $\varepsilon\Lambda \le \frac{1}{2}$.
Since the above holds identically for $t$, this implies
$$d(\Phi\gamma_1, \Phi\gamma_2) \le \frac{1}{2} d(\gamma_1, \gamma_2)$$
as needed.

_This is a cleaned-up version of a portion of a lecture from Math 55b in Spring 2015,
instructed by Dennis Gaitsgory._
