Title: The Structure Theorem over PID's
Date: 2016-07-12 13:37
Tags: linear algebra
Slug: pid-structure
Status: published
original_url: 2016/07/12/the-structure-theorem-over-pids/

In this post I'll describe the structure theorem over PID's which generalizes the following results:

- Finite dimensional vector fields over $k$ are all of the form $k^{\oplus n}$,
- The classification theorem for finitely generated abelian groups,
- The Frobenius normal form of a matrix,
- The Jordan decomposition of a matrix.

## 1. Some ring theory prerequisites

(Prototypical example for this section: $R = \mathbb Z$.)

Before I can state the main theorem, I need to define a few terms for UFD's,
which behave much like $\mathbb Z$:
Our intuition from the case $R = \mathbb Z$ basically carries over verbatim.
We don't even need to deal with prime ideals and can factor elements instead.

> **Definition 1.** If $R$ is a UFD,
> then $p \in R$ is a **prime element** if $(p)$ is a prime ideal and $p \neq 0$.
> For UFD's this is equivalent to the following property: if $p = xy$ then either $x$ or $y$ is a unit.

So for example in $\mathbb Z$ the set of prime elements is $\{\pm2, \pm3, \pm5, \dots\}$.
Now, since $R$ is a UFD, every element $r$ factors into a product of prime elements
$$r = u p_1^{e_1} p_2^{e_2} \dots p_m^{e_m}$$

> **Definition 2.** We say $r$ **divides** $s$ if $s = r'r$ for some $r' \in R$. This is written $r \mid s$.

<p></p>

> **Example 3** **(Divisibility in $\mathbb Z$)**
>
> The number $0$ is divisible by every element of $\mathbb Z$. All other divisibility as expected.

<p></p>

> **Question 4**
>
> Show that $r \mid s$ if and only if the exponent of each prime in $r$ is less
> than or equal to the corresponding exponent in $s$.

Now, the case of interest is the even stronger case when $R$ is a PID:

> **Proposition 5** **(PID's are Noetherian UFD's)**
>
> If $R$ is a PID, then it is Noetherian and also a UFD.

_Proof:_ The fact that $R$ is Noetherian is obvious.
For $R$ to be a UFD we essentially repeat the proof for $\mathbb Z$,
using the fact that $(a,b)$ is principal in order to extract $\gcd(a,b)$. $\Box$

In this case, we have a Chinese remainder theorem for elements.

> **Theorem 6** **(Chinese remainder theorem for rings)**
>
> Let $m$ and $n$ be relatively prime elements, meaning $(m) + (n) = (1)$. Then
> $$R / (mn) \cong R/m \times R/n.$$

_Proof:_ This is the same as the proof of the usual Chinese remainder theorem.
First, since $(m,n)=(1)$ we have $am+bn=1$ for some $a$ and $b$. Then we have a map
$$R/m \times R/n \rightarrow R/(mn) \quad\text{by}\quad (r,s) \mapsto r \cdot bn + s \cdot am.$$
One can check that this map is well-defined and an isomorphism of rings.
(Diligent readers invited to do so.) $\Box$

Finally, we need to introduce the concept of a Noetherian $R$-module.

> **Definition 7.** An $R$-module $M$ is **Noetherian** if it satisfies one of the two equivalent conditions:
>
> - Its submodules obey the ascending chain condition:
>   there is no infinite sequence of modules $M_1 \subsetneq M_2 \subsetneq \dots$.
> - All submodules of $M$ (including $M$ itself) are finitely generated.

This generalizes the notion of a Noetherian ring:
a Noetherian ring $R$ is one for which $R$ is Noetherian as an $R$-module.

> **Question 8**
>
> Check these two conditions are equivalent. (Copy the proof for rings.)

## 2. The structure theorem

Our structure theorem takes two forms:

> **Theorem 9** **(Structure theorem, invariant form)**
>
> Let $R$ be a PID and let $M$ be any finitely generated $R$-module. Then
> $$M \cong \bigoplus_{i=1}^m R/s_i$$
> for some $s_i$ satisfying $s_1 \mid s_2 \mid \dots \mid s_m$.

<p></p>

> **Corollary 10** **(Structure theorem, primary form)**
>
> Let $R$ be a PID and let $M$ be any finitely generated $R$-module. Then
> $$M \cong R^{\oplus r} \oplus R/(q_1) \oplus R/(q_2) \oplus \dots \oplus R/(q_m)$$
> where $q_i = p_i^{e_i}$ for some prime element $p_i$ and integer $e_i \ge 1$.

_Proof:_ Factor each $s_i$ into prime factors (since $R$ is a UFD), then use the Chinese remainder theorem.
$\Box$

> **Remark 11.** In both theorems the decomposition is unique up to permutations of the summands;
> good to know, but I won't prove this.

## 3. Reduction to maps of free $R$-modules

The proof of the structure theorem proceeds in two main steps.
First, we reduce the problem to a _linear algebra_ problem involving free $R$-modules $R^{\oplus d}$.
Once that's done, we just have to play with matrices; this is done in the next section.

Suppose $M$ is finitely generated by $d$ elements. Then there is a surjective map of $R$-modules
$$R^{\oplus d} \twoheadrightarrow M$$
whose image on the basis of $R^{\oplus d}$ are the generators of $M$. Let $K$ denote the kernel.

We claim that $K$ is finitely generated as well. To this end we prove that

> **Lemma 12** **(Direct sum of Noetherian modules is Noetherian)**
>
> Let $M$ and $N$ be two Noetherian $R$-modules.
> Then the direct sum $M \oplus N$ is also a Noetherian $R$-module.

_Proof:_ It suffices to show that if $L \subseteq M \oplus N$, then $L$ is finitely generated.
It's unfortunately not true that $L = P \oplus Q$ (take $M = N = \mathbb Z$
$L = \{(n,n) \mid n \in \mathbb Z\}$) so we will have to be more careful.

Consider the submodules

$$
\begin{aligned} A &= \left\{ x \in M \mid (x,0) \in L \right\} \subseteq M \\
B &= \left\{ y \in N \mid \exists x \in M : (x,y) \in L \right\} \subseteq N. \end{aligned}
$$

(Note the asymmetry for $A$ and $B$:
the proof doesn't work otherwise.) Then $A$ is finitely generated by $a_1$, …, $a_k$,
and $B$ is finitely generated by $b_1$, …, $b_\ell$.
Let $x_i = (a_i, 0)$ and let $y_i = (\ast, b_i)$ be elements of $L$ (where the
$\ast$'s are arbitrary things we don't care about). Then $x_i$ and $y_i$ together generate $L$. $\Box$

> **Question 13**
>
> Deduce that for $R$ a PID, $R^{\oplus d}$ is Noetherian.

Hence $K \subseteq R^{\oplus d}$ is finitely generated as claimed.
So we can find another surjective map $R^{\oplus f} \twoheadrightarrow K$.
Consequently, we have a composition
$$R^{\oplus f} \twoheadrightarrow K \hookrightarrow R^{\oplus d} \twoheadrightarrow M.$$
Observe that $M$ is the _cokernel_ of the composition $T : R^{\oplus f} \rightarrow R^{\oplus d}$, i.e.
we have that
$$M \cong R^{\oplus d} / \text{im }(T).$$
So it suffices to understand the map $T$ well.

## 4. Smith normal form

The idea is now that we have reduced our problem to studying linear maps
$T : R^{\oplus m} \rightarrow R^{\oplus n}$, which can be thought of as a generic matrix

$$
T = \begin{pmatrix} a_{11} & \dots & a_{1m} \\ \vdots & \ddots & \vdots \\
a_{n1} & \dots & a_{nm} \end{pmatrix}
$$

for the standard basis $e_1$, …, $e_m$ of $R^{\oplus m}$ and $f_1$, …, $f_n$ of $N$.

Of course, as you might expect it ought to be possible to change the given basis
of $T$ such that $T$ has a nicer matrix form.
We already saw this in _Jordan form_,
where we had a map $T : V \rightarrow V$ and changed the basis so that $T$ was "almost diagonal".
This time, we have _two_ sets of bases we can change, so we would hope to get a diagonal basis,
or even better.

Before proceeding let's think about how we might edit the matrix: what operations are permitted?
Here are some examples:

- Swapping rows and columns, which just corresponds to re-ordering the basis.

- Adding a multiple of a column to another column.
  For example, if we add $3$ times the first column to the second column,
  this is equivalent to replacing the basis

  $$(e_1, e_2, e_3, \dots, e_m) \mapsto (e_1, e_2+3e_1, e_3, \dots, e_m).$$

- Adding a multiple of a row to another row.
  One can see that adding $3$ times the first row to the second row is equivalent to replacing the basis

  $$(f_1, f_2, f_3, \dots, f_n) \mapsto (f_1-3f_2, f_2, f_3, \dots, f_n).$$
  More generally, If $A$ is an invertible $n \times n$ matrix we can replace $T$ with $AT$.
  This corresponds to replacing
  $$(f_1, \dots, f_n) \mapsto (A(f_1), \dots, A(f_n))$$
  (the "invertible" condition just guarantees the latter is a basis).
  Of course similarly we can replace $X$ with $XB$ where $B$ is an invertible $m \times m$ matrix;
  this corresponds to
  $$(e_1, \dots, e_m) \mapsto (B^{-1}(e_1), \dots, B^{-1}(e_m))$$
  Armed with this knowledge, we can now approach the following result.

> **Theorem 14** **(Smith normal form)**
>
> Let $R$ be a PID. Let $M = R^{\oplus m}$ and $N = R^{\oplus n}$ be free
> $R$-modules and let $T : M \rightarrow N$ be a linear map. Set $k = \min(m,n)$.
>
> Then we can select a pair of new bases for $M$ and $N$ such that $T$ has only diagonal entries $s_1$, $s_2$,
> …, $s_k$ and $s_1 \mid s_2 \mid \dots \mid s_k$.
>
> So if $m > n$, the matrix should take the form
>
> $$
> \begin{pmatrix} s_1 & 0 & 0 & 0 & \dots & 0 \\ 0 & s_2 & 0 & 0 & \dots & 0 \\
> \vdots & \vdots & \ddots & \vdots & \dots & \vdots \\ 0 & 0 & 0 & s_n & \dots & 0 \end{pmatrix}.
> $$
>
> and similarly when $m \le n$.

<p></p>

> **Question 15**
>
> Show that Smith normal form implies the structure theorem.

<p></p>

> **Remark 16.** Note that this is not a generalization of Jordan form.
>
> - In Jordan form we consider maps $T : V \rightarrow V$;
>   note that the source and target space are the _same_, and we are considering one basis for the space $V$.
> - In Smith form the maps $T : M \rightarrow N$ are between _different_ modules,
>   and we pick _two_ sets of bases (one for $M$ and one for $N$).

<p></p>

> **Example 17** **(Example of Smith normal form)**
>
> To give a flavor of the idea of the proof,
> let's work through a concrete example with the following matrix with entries from $\mathbb Z$:
> $$\begin{pmatrix} 18 & 38 & 48 \\ 14 & 30 & 38 \end{pmatrix}.$$
> The GCD of all the entries is $2$, and so motivated by this,
> we perform the **Euclidean algorithm on the left column**: subtract the second row from the first row,
> then three times the first row from the second:
>
> $$
> \begin{pmatrix} 18 & 38 & 48 \\ 14 & 30 & 38 \end{pmatrix} \mapsto
> \begin{pmatrix} 4 & 8 & 10 \\ 14 & 30 & 38 \end{pmatrix} \mapsto \begin{pmatrix}
> 4 & 8 & 10 \\ 2 & 6 & 2 \end{pmatrix}.
> $$
>
> Now that the GCD of $2$ is present, we move it to the upper-left by switching the two rows,
> and then kill off all the entries in the same row/column; since $2$ was the GCD all along,
> we isolate $2$ completely:
>
> $$
> \begin{pmatrix} 4 & 8 & 10 \\ 2 & 6 & 2 \end{pmatrix} \mapsto \begin{pmatrix}
> 2 & 6 & 2 \\ 4 & 8 & 10 \end{pmatrix} \mapsto \begin{pmatrix} 2 & 6 & 2 \\ 0 &
> -4 & 6 \\ \end{pmatrix} \mapsto \begin{pmatrix} 2 & 0 & 0 \\ 0 & -4 & 6 \end{pmatrix}.
> $$
>
> This reduces the problem to a $1 \times 2$ matrix. So we just apply the Euclidean algorithm again there:
>
> $$
> \begin{pmatrix} 2 & 0 & 0 \\ 0 & -4 & 6 \end{pmatrix} \mapsto \begin{pmatrix}
> 2 & 0 & 0 \\ 0 & -4 & 2 \end{pmatrix} \mapsto \begin{pmatrix} 2 & 0 & 0 \\ 0 & 0
> & 2 \end{pmatrix} \mapsto \begin{pmatrix} 2 & 0 & 0 \\ 0 & 2 & 0 \end{pmatrix}.
> $$

Now all we have to do is generalize this proof to work with any PID.
It's intuitively clear how to do this: the PID condition more or less lets you perform a Euclidean algorithm.

_Proof:_ Begin with a generic matrix

$$
T = \begin{pmatrix} a_{11} & \dots & a_{1m} \\ \vdots & \ddots & \vdots \\
a_{n1} & \dots & a_{nm} \end{pmatrix}
$$

We want to show, by a series of operations (gradually changing the given basis)
that we can rearrange the matrix into Smith normal form.

Define $\gcd(x,y)$ to be any generator of the principal ideal $(x,y)$.

> **Claim 18** **("Euclidean algorithm")**
>
> If $a$ and $b$ are entries in the same row or column,
> we can change bases to replace $a$ with $\gcd(a,b)$ and $b$ with something else.

_Proof:_ We do just the case of columns. By hypothesis, $\gcd(a,b) = xa+yb$ for some $x,y \in R$.
We must have $(x,y) = (1)$ now (we're in a UFD). So there are $u$ and $v$ such that $xu + yv = 1$. Then

$$
\begin{pmatrix} x & y \\ -v & u \end{pmatrix} \begin{pmatrix} a \\ b
\end{pmatrix} = \begin{pmatrix} \gcd(a,b) \\ \text{something} \end{pmatrix}
$$

and the first matrix is invertible (check this!), as desired. $\Box$

Let $s_1 = (a_{ij})_{i,j}$ be the GCD of all entries.
Now by repeatedly applying this algorithm, we can cause $s$ to appear in the upper left hand corner.
Then, we use it to kill off all the entries in the first row and the first column, thus arriving at a matrix

$$
\begin{pmatrix} s_1 & 0 & 0 & \dots & 0 \\ 0 & a_{22}' & a_{23}' & \dots &
a_{2n}' \\ 0 & a_{32}' & a_{33}' & \dots & a_{3n}' \\
\vdots&\vdots&\vdots&\ddots&\vdots \\ 0 & a_{m2}' & a_{m3}' & \dots & a_{mn}' \\ \end{pmatrix}.
$$

Now we repeat the same procedure with this lower-right $(m-1) \times (n-1)$ matrix, and so on.
This gives the Smith normal form. $\Box$

With the Smith normal form, we have in the original situation that
$$M \cong R^{\oplus d} / \text{im } T$$
and applying the theorem to $T$ completes the proof of the structure theorem.

## 5. Applications

Now, we can apply our structure theorem! I'll just sketch proofs of these and let the reader fill in details.

> **Corollary 19** **(Finite-dimensional vector spaces are all isomorphic)**
>
> A vector space $V$ over a field $k$ has a finite spanning set of vectors.
> Then for some $n$, $V \cong k^{\oplus n}$.

_Proof:_ In the structure theorem, $k / (s_i) \in \{0,k\}$. $\Box$

<p></p>

> **Corollary 20** **(Frobenius normal form)**
>
> Let $T : V \rightarrow V$ where $V$ is a finite-dimensional vector space over an
> arbitrary field $k$ (not necessarily algebraically closed).
> Then one can write $T$ as a block-diagonal matrix whose blocks are all of the form
>
> $$
> \begin{pmatrix} 0 & 0 & 0 & \dots & 0 & \ast \\ 1 & 0 & 0 & \dots & 0 & \ast
> \\ 0 & 1 & 0 & \dots & 0 & \ast \\ \vdots&\vdots&\vdots&\ddots&\vdots&\vdots \\
> 0 & 0 & 0 & \dots & 1 & \ast \\ \end{pmatrix}.
> $$

_Proof:_ View $V$ as a $k[x]$-module with action $x \cdot v = T(v)$.
By theorem $V \cong \bigoplus_i k[x] / (s_i)$ for some polynomials $s_i$,
where $s_1 \mid s_2 \mid s_3 \mid \dots$. Write each block in the form described. $\Box$

<p></p>

> **Corollary 21** **(Jordan normal form)**
>
> Let $T : V \rightarrow V$ where $V$ is a finite-dimensional vector space over an
> arbitrary field $k$ which is algebraically closed. Prove that $T$ can be written in Jordan form.

_Proof:_ We now use the structure theorem in its primary form.
Since $k[x]$ is algebraically closed each $p_i$ is a linear factor,
so every summand looks like $k[x] / (x-a)^m$ for some $m$. $\Box$

_This is a draft of Chapter 15 of the Napkin._
