Title: Positive Definite Quadratic Forms
Date: 2017-06-12 13:37
Tags: math, number theory
Slug: qforms
Status: published
original_url: 2017/06/12/notes-on-positive-definite-quadratic-forms/

I'm reading through _Primes of the Form $x^2+ny^2$_,
by David Cox ([link](http://www.amazon.com/Primes-Form-x2-ny2-Multiplication/dp/1118390180); it's good!).
Here are the high-level notes I took on the first chapter, which is about the theory of quadratic forms.

(Meta point re blog: I'm probably going to start posting more and more of these
more high-level notes/sketches on this blog on topics that I've been just learning.
Up til now I've been mostly only posting things that I understand well and for
which I have a very polished exposition.
But the perfect is the enemy of the good here; given that I'm taking these notes for my own sake,
I may as well share them to help others.)

## 1. Overview

> **Definition 1.** For us a **quadratic form** is a polynomial $Q = Q(x,y) = ax^2 + bxy + cy^2$, where $a$,
> $b$, $c$ are some integers. We say that it is **primitive** if $\gcd(a,b,c) = 1$.

For example, we have the famous quadratic form
$$Q_{\text{Fermat}}(x,y) = x^2+y^2.$$
As readers are probably aware,
we can say a lot about exactly which integers can be represented by $Q_{\text{Fermat}}$:
by **Fermat's Christmas theorem**,
the primes $p \equiv 1 \pmod 4$ (and $p=2$) can all be written as the sum of two squares,
while the primes $p \equiv 3 \pmod 4$ cannot. For convenience, let us say that:

> **Definition 2.** Let $Q$ be a quadratic form.
> We say it **represents** the integer $m$ if there exists $x,y \in \mathbb Z$ with $m = Q(x,y)$.
> Moreover, $Q$ **properly represents** $m$ if one can find such $x$ and $y$ which are also relatively prime.

The basic question is: **what can we say about which primes/integers are
properly represented by a quadratic form?** In fact,
we will later restrict our attention to "positive definite" forms (described later).

For example, Fermat's Christmas theorem now rewrites as:

> **Theorem 3** **(Fermat's Christmas theorem for primes)**
>
> An odd prime $p$ is (properly) represented by $Q_{\text{Fermat}}$ if and only if $p \equiv 1 \pmod 4$.

The proof of this is classical,
see for example [my olympiad handout](http://www.mit.edu/~evanchen/handouts/ORPR/ORPR.pdf).
We also have the formulation for odd integers:

> **Theorem 4** **(Fermat's Christmas theorem for odd integers)**
>
> An odd integer $m$ is properly represented by $Q_{\text{Fermat}}$ if and only
> if all prime factors of $m$ are $1 \pmod 4$.

_Proof:_ For the "if" direction,
we use the fact that $Q_{\text{Fermat}}$ is multiplicative in the sense that
$$(x^2+y^2)(u^2+v^2) = (xu \pm yv)^2 + (xv \mp yu)^2.$$
For the "only if" part we use the fact that if a multiple of a prime $p$ is
properly represented by $Q_{\text{Fermat}}$, then so is $p$.
This follows by noticing that if $x^2+y^2 \equiv 0 \pmod p$ (and
$xy \not\equiv 0 \pmod p$) then $(x/y)^2 \equiv -1 \pmod p$. $\Box$

Tangential remark: the two ideas in the proof will grow up in the following way.

- The fact that $Q_{\text{Fermat}}$ "multiplies nicely" will grow up to become
  the so-called **composition** of quadratic forms.
- The second fact will **not** generalize for an arbitrary form $Q$.
  Instead, we will see that if a multiple of $p$ is represented by a form $Q$
  then some form of the same "discriminant" will represent the prime $p$,
  but this form need not be the same as $Q$ itself.

## 2. Equivalence of forms, and the discriminant

The first thing we should do is figure out when two forms are essentially the same: for example,
$x^2+5y^2$ and $5x^2+y^2$ should clearly be considered the same.
More generally, if we think of $Q$ as acting on $\mathbb Z^{\oplus 2}$ and $T$
is any automorphism of $\mathbb Z^{\oplus 2}$, then $Q \circ T$ should be considered the same as $Q$.
Specifically,

> **Definition 5.** Two forms $Q_1$ and $Q_2$ said to be **equivalent** if there exists
> $$T = \begin{pmatrix} p & q \\ r & s \end{pmatrix} \in \text{GL }(2,\mathbb Z)$$
> such that $Q_2(x,y) = Q_1(px+ry, qx+sy)$.
> We have $\det T = ps-qr = \pm 1$ and so we say the equivalence is
>
> - a **proper equivalence** if $\det T = +1$, and
> - an **improper equivalence** if $\det T = -1$.

So we generally will only care about forms up to proper equivalence.
(It will be useful to distinguish between proper/improper equivalence later.)

Naturally we seek some invariants under this operation. By far the most important is:

> **Definition 6.** The **discriminant** of a quadratic form $Q = ax^2 + bxy + cy^2$ is defined as
> $$D = b^2-4ac.$$
> The discriminant is invariant under equivalence (check this).
> Note also that we also have $D \equiv 0 , 1 \pmod 4$.

Observe that we have
$$4a \cdot (ax^2+bxy+cy^2) = (2ax + by)^2 - Dy^2.$$
So if $D < 0$ and $a > 0$ (thus $c > 0$ too) then $ax^2+bxy+cy^2 > 0$ for all $x,y > 0$.
Such quadratic forms are called **positive definite**, and we will restrict our attention to these forms.

Now that we have this invariant,
we may as well classify equivalence classes of quadratic forms for a fixed discriminant.
It turns out this can be done explicitly.

> **Definition 7.** A quadratic form $Q = ax^2 + bxy + cy^2$ is **reduced** if
>
> - it is primitive and positive definite,
> - $|b| \le a \le c$, and
> - $b \ge 0$ if either $|b| = a$ or $a = c$.

> **Exercise 8.** Check there only finitely many reduced forms of a fixed discriminant.

Then the big huge theorem is:

> **Theorem 9** **(Reduced forms give a set of representatives)**
>
> Every primitive positive definite form $Q$ of discriminant is properly equivalent to a unique reduced form.
> We call this the **reduction** of $Q$. <span id="thmdisc_rep"></span>

_Proof:_ Omitted due to length, but completely elementary. It is a reduction argument with some number of cases. $\Box$

Thus, for any discriminant $D$ we can consider the set
$$\operatorname{Cl}(D) = \left\{ \text{reduced forms of discriminant } D \right\}$$
which will be the equivalence classes of positive definite of discriminant $D$.
By abuse of notation we will also consider it as the set of equivalence classes
of primitive positive definite forms of discriminant $D$.

We also define $h(D) = \left\lvert \operatorname{Cl}(D) \right\rvert$; by the exercise, $h(D) < \infty$.
This is called the **class number**.

Moreover, we have $h(D) \ge 1$,
because we can take $x^2 - D/4 y^2$ for $D \equiv 0 \pmod 4$ and
$x^2 + xy + (1-D)/4 y^2$ for $D \equiv 1 \pmod 4$. We call this form the **principal form**.

## 3. Tables of quadratic forms

> **Example 10** **(Examples of quadratic forms with $h(D) = 1$, $D \equiv 0 \pmod 4$)**
>
> The following discriminants have class number $h(D) = 1$, hence having only the principal form:
>
> - $D = -4$, with form $x^2 + y^2$.
> - $D = -8$, with form $x^2 + 2y^2$.
> - $D = -12$, with form $x^2+3y^2$.
> - $D = -16$, with form $x^2 + 4y^2$.
> - $D = -28$, with form $x^2 + 7y^2$.
>
> This is in fact the complete list when $D \equiv 0 \pmod 4$.
>
> **Example 11** **(Examples of quadratic forms with $h(D) = 1$, $D \equiv 1 \pmod 4$)**
>
> The following discriminants have class number $h(D) = 1$, hence having only the principal form:
>
> - $D = -3$, with form $x^2 + xy + y^2$.
> - $D = -7$, with form $x^2 + xy + 2y^2$.
> - $D = -11$, with form $x^2 + xy + 3y^2$.
> - $D = -19$, with form $x^2 + xy + 5y^2$.
> - $D = -27$, with form $x^2 + xy + 7y^2$.
> - $D = -43$, with form $x^2 + xy + 11y^2$.
> - $D = -67$, with form $x^2 + xy + 17y^2$.
> - $D = -163$, with form $x^2 + xy + 41y^2$.
>
> This is in fact the complete list when $D \equiv 1 \pmod 4$.

<p></p>

> **Example 12** **(More examples of quadratic forms)**
>
> Here are tables for small discriminants with $h(D) > 1$. When $D \equiv 0 \pmod 4$ we have
>
> - $D = -20$, with $h(D) = 2$ forms $2x^2 + 2xy + 3y^2$ and $x^2 + 5y^2$.
> - $D = -24$, with $h(D) = 2$ forms $2x^2 + 3y^2$ and $x^2 + 6y^2$.
> - $D = -32$, with $h(D) = 2$ forms $3x^2 + 2xy + 3y^2$ and $x^2 + 8y^2$.
> - $D = -36$, with $h(D) = 2$ forms $2x^2 + 2xy + 5y^2$ and $x^2 + 9y^2$.
> - $D = -40$, with $h(D) = 2$ forms $2x^2 + 5y^2$ and $x^2 + 10y^2$.
> - $D = -44$, with $h(D) = 3$ forms $3x^2 \pm 2xy + 4y^2$ and $x^2 + 11y^2$.
>
> As for $D \equiv 1 \pmod 4$ we have
>
> - $D = -15$, with $h(D) = 2$ forms $2x^2 + xy + 2y^2$ and $x^2 + xy + 4y^2$.
> - $D = -23$, with $h(D) = 3$ forms $2x^2 \pm xy + 3y^2$ and $x^2+ xy + 6y^2$.
> - $D = -31$, with $h(D) = 3$ forms $2x^2 \pm xy + 4$ and $x^2 + xy + 8y^2$.
> - $D = -39$, with $h(D) = 4$ forms $3x^2 + 3xy + 4y^2$, $2x^2 \pm 2xy + 5y^2$ and $x^2 + xy + 10y^2$.

<p></p>

> **Example 13** **(Even More Examples of quadratic forms)**
>
> Here are some more selected examples:
>
> - $D = -56$ has $h(D) = 4$ forms $x^2+14y^2$, $2x^2+7y^2$ and $3x^2 \pm 2xy + 5y^2$.
> - $D = -108$ has $h(D) = 3$ forms $x^2+27y^2$ and $4x^2 \pm 2xy + 7y^2$.
> - $D = -256$ has $h(D) = 4$ forms $x^2+64y^2$, $4x^2+4xy+17y^2$ and $5x^2\pm2xy+13y^2$.

## 4. The Character $\chi_D$

We can now connect this to primes $p$ as follows.
Earlier we played with $Q_{\text{Fermat}} = x^2+y^2$, and observed that for odd primes $p$,
$p \equiv 1 \pmod 4$ if and only if some _multiple_ of $p$ is properly represented by $Q_{\text{Fermat}}$.

Our generalization is as follows:

> **Theorem 14** **(Primes represented by some quadratic form)** <span id="thmrep_some_form"></span>
>
> Let $D < 0$ be a discriminant, and let $p \nmid D$ be an odd prime. Then the following are equivalent:
>
> - $\left( \frac Dp \right) = 1$, i.e. $D$ is a quadratic residue modulo $p$.
> - The prime $p$ is (properly) represented by _some_ reduced quadratic form in $\operatorname{Cl}(D)$.

This generalizes our result for $Q_{\text{Fermat}}$, but note that it uses $h(-4) = 1$ in an essential way!
That is: if $(-1/p) = 1$, we know $p$ is represented by _some_ quadratic form of
discriminant $D = -4$… but only since $h(-4) = 1$ do we know that this form
reduces to $Q_{\text{Fermat}} = x^2+y^2$.

_Proof:_ First assume WLOG that $p \nmid 4a$ and $Q(x,y) \equiv 0 \pmod p$.
Thus $p \nmid y$, since otherwise this would imply $x \equiv y \equiv 0 \pmod p$.
Then
$$0 \equiv 4a \cdot Q(x,y) \equiv (2ax + by)^2 - Dy^2 \pmod p$$
hence $D \equiv \left( 2axy^{-1} + b \right)^2 \pmod p$.

The converse direction is amusing: let $m^2 = D + pk$ for integers $m$, $k$. Consider the quadratic form
$$Q(x,y) = px^2 + mxy + ky^2.$$
It is primitive of discriminant $D$ and $Q(1,0) = p$.
Now $Q$ may not be reduced, but that's fine: just take the reduction of $Q$,
which must also properly represent $p$. $\Box$

Thus to every discriminant $D < 0$ we can attach the **Legendre character** (is that the name?),
which is a homomorphism

$$\chi_D = \left( \tfrac{D}{\bullet} \right) \colon \left( \mathbb Z / D\mathbb Z \right)^\times \rightarrow \{ \pm 1 \}$$

with the property that if $p$ is a rational prime not dividing $D$,
then $\chi_D(p) = \left( \frac{D}{p} \right)$.
This is abuse of notation since I should technically write $\chi_D(p \pmod D)$, but there is no harm done:
one can check by quadratic reciprocity that if $p \equiv q \pmod D$ then $\chi_D(p) = \chi_D(q)$.
Thus our previous result becomes:

> **Theorem 15** **($\ker(\chi_D)$ consists of representable primes)**
>
> Let $p \nmid D$ be prime. Then $p \in \ker(\chi_D)$ if and only if some
> quadratic form in $\operatorname{Cl}(D)$ represents $p$.

As a corollary of this, using the fact that $h(-8) = h(-12) = h(-28) = 1$ one can prove that

> **Corollary 16** **(Fermat-type results for $h(-4n) = 1$)**
>
> Let $p > 7$ be a prime. Then $p$ is
>
> - of the form $x^2 + 2y^2$ if and only if $p \equiv 1, 3 \pmod 8$.
> - of the form $x^2 + 3y^2$ if and only if $p \equiv 1 \pmod 3$.
> - of the form $x^2 + 7y^2$ if and only if $p \equiv 1, 2, 4 \pmod 7$.

_Proof:_ The congruence conditions are equivalent to $(-4n/p) = 1$,
and as before the only point is that the only reduced quadratic form
for these $D = -4n$ is the principal one. $\Box$

## 5. Genus theory

What if $h(D) > 1$? Sometimes, we can still figure out which primes go where just by taking mods.

Let $Q \in \operatorname{Cl}(D)$. Then it **represents** some residue classes of $(\mathbb Z/D\mathbb Z)^\times$.
In that case we call the set of residue classes represented the **genus** of the quadratic form $Q$.

> **Example 17** **(Genus theory of $D = -20$)**
>
> Consider $D = -20$, with
> $$\ker(\chi_D) = \left\{ 1, 3, 7, 9 \right\} \subseteq (\mathbb Z/D\mathbb Z)^\times.$$
> We consider the two elements of $\operatorname{Cl}(D)$:
>
> - $x^2 + 5y^2$ represents $1, 9 \in (\mathbb Z/20\mathbb Z)^\times$.
> - $2x^2+2xy+3y^2$ represents $3, 7 \in (\mathbb Z/20\mathbb Z)^\times$.
>
> Now suppose for example that $p \equiv 9 \pmod{20}$.
> It must be represented by one of these two quadratic forms,
> but the latter form is never $9 \pmod{20}$ and so it must be the first one.
> Thus we conclude that
>
> - $p = x^2+5y^2$ if and only if $p \equiv 1, 9 \pmod{20}$.
> - $p = 2x^2 + 2xy + 3y^2$ if and only if $p \equiv 3, 7 \pmod{20}$.

The thing that makes this work is that each genus appears exactly once.
We are not always so lucky: for example when $D = -108$ we have that

> **Example 18** **(Genus theory of $D = -108$)**
>
> The two elements of $\operatorname{Cl}(-108)$ are:
>
> - $x^2+27y^2$, which represents exactly the $1 \pmod 3$ elements of $(\mathbb Z/D\mathbb Z)^\times$.
> - $4x^2 \pm 2xy + 7y^2$, which _also_ represents exactly the $1 \pmod 3$
>   elements of $(\mathbb Z/D\mathbb Z)^\times$.
>
> So the best we can conclude is that $p = x^2+27y^2$ OR $p = 4x^2\pm2xy+7y^2$ if
> and only if $p \equiv 1 \pmod 3$. This is because the two distinct quadratic
> forms of discriminant $-108$ happen to have the same genus.

We now prove that:

> **Theorem 19** **(Genii are cosets of $\ker(\chi_D)$)**
>
> Let $D$ be a discriminant and consider the Legendre character $\chi_D$.
>
> - The genus of the principal form of discriminant $D$ constitutes a subgroup $H$ of $\ker(\chi_D)$,
>   which we call the **principal genus**.
> - Any genus of a quadratic form in $\operatorname{Cl}(D)$ is a coset of the principal genus $H$ in $\ker(\chi_D)$.

_Proof:_ For the first part, we aim to show $H$ is multiplicatively closed.
For $D \equiv 0 \pmod 4$, $D = -4n$ we use the fact that
$$(x^2+ny^2)(u^2+nv^2) = (xu \pm nyv)^2 + n(xv \mp yu)^2.$$
For $D \equiv 1 \pmod 4$, we instead appeal to another "magic" identity
$$4\left( x^2+xy+\frac{1-D}{4}y^2 \right) \equiv (2x+y)^2 \pmod D$$
and it follows from here that $H$ is actually the set of squares in $(\mathbb Z/D\mathbb Z)^\times$,
which is obviously a subgroup.

Now we show that other quadratic forms have genus equal to a coset of the principal genus.
For $D \equiv 0 \pmod 4$, with $D = -4n$ we can write
$$a(ax^2+bxy+cy^2) = (ax+b/2 y)^2 + ny^2$$
and thus the desired coset is shown to be $a^{-1} H$. As for $D \equiv 1 \pmod 4$, we have
$$4a \cdot (ax^2+bxy+cy^2) = (2ax + by)^2 - Dy^2 \equiv (2ax+by)^2 \pmod D$$
so the desired coset is also $a^{-1} H$, since $H$ was the set of squares. $\Box$

Thus every genus is a _coset_ of $H$ in $\ker(\chi_D)$. Thus:

> **Definition 20.** We define the quotient group
> $$\operatorname{Gen}(D) = \ker(\chi_D) / H$$
> which is the set of all genuses in discriminant $D$.
> One can view this as an abelian group by coset multiplication.

Thus there is a natural map
$$\Phi_D \colon \operatorname{Cl}(D) \twoheadrightarrow \operatorname{Gen}(D).$$
(The map is surjective by [Theorem 14](#thmrep_some_form).)
We also remark than $\operatorname{Gen}(D)$ is quite well-behaved:

> **Proposition 21** **(Structure of $\operatorname{Gen}(D)$)**
>
> The group $\operatorname{Gen}(D)$ is isomorphic to $(\mathbb Z/2\mathbb Z)^{\oplus m}$ for some integer $m$.

_Proof:_ Observe that $H$ contains all the squares of $\ker(\chi_D)$:
if $f$ is the principal form then $f(t,0) = t^2$.
Thus claim each element of $\operatorname{Gen}(D)$ has order at most $2$,
which implies the result since $\operatorname{Gen}(D)$ is a finite abelian group.
$\Box$

In fact, one can compute the order of $\operatorname{Gen}(D)$ exactly,
but for this post I Will just state the result.

> **Theorem 22** **(Order of $\operatorname{Gen}(D)$)**
>
> Let $D < 0$ be a discriminant, and let $r$ be the number of distinct odd primes which divide $D$.
> Define $\mu$ by:
>
> - $\mu = r$ if $D \equiv 1 \pmod 4$.
> - $\mu = r$ if $D = -4n$ and $n \equiv 3 \pmod 4$.
> - $\mu = r+1$ if $D = -4n$ and $n \equiv 1,2 \pmod 4$.
> - $\mu = r+1$ if $D = -4n$ and $n \equiv 4 \pmod 8$.
> - $\mu = r+2$ if $D = -4n$ and $n \equiv 0 \pmod 8$.
>
> Then $\left\lvert \operatorname{Gen}(D) \right\rvert = 2^{\mu-1}$.

## 6. Composition

We have already used once the nice identity
$$(x^2+ny^2)(u^2+nv^2) = (xu \pm nyv)^2 + n(xv \mp yu)^2.$$
We are going to try and generalize this for any two quadratic forms in $\operatorname{Cl}(D)$. Specifically,

> **Proposition 23** **(Composition defines a group operation)**
>
> Let $f,g \in \operatorname{Cl}(D)$.
> Then there is a unique $h \in \operatorname{Cl}(D)$ and bilinear forms
> $B_i(x,y,z,w) = a_ixz + b_ixw + c_iyz + d_iyw$ for $i=1,2$ such that
>
> - $f(x,y) g(z,w) = h(B_1(x,y,z,w), B_2(x,y,z,w))$.
> - $a_1b_2 - a_2b_1 = +f(1,0)$.
> - $a_1c_2 - a_2c_1 = +g(1,0)$.

In fact, without the latter two constraints we would instead have
$a_1b_2 - a_2b_1 = \pm f(1,0)$ and $a_1c_2 - a_2c_1 = \pm g(1,0)$,
and each choice of signs would yield one of four (possibly different) forms.
So requiring both signs to be positive makes this operation well-defined.
(This is why we like proper equivalence; it gives us a well-defined group structure,
whereas with improper equivalence it would be impossible to put a group structure on the forms above.)

Taking this for granted, we then have that

> **Theorem 24** **(Form class group)**
>
> Let $D \equiv 0, 1 \pmod 4$, $D < 0$ be a discriminant.
> Then $\operatorname{Cl}(D)$ becomes an abelian group under composition, where
>
> - The identity of $\operatorname{Cl}(D)$ is the principal form, and
> - The inverse of the form $ax^2+bxy+cy^2$ is $ax^2-bxy+cy^2$.

This group is called the **form class group**.

We then have a group homomorphism
$$\Phi_D \colon \operatorname{Cl}(D) \twoheadrightarrow \operatorname{Gen}(D).$$
Observe that $ax^2 + bxy + cy^2$ and $ax^2 - bxy + cy^2$ are inverses and that
their $\Phi_D$ images coincide (being improperly equivalent);
this is expressed in the fact that $\operatorname{Gen}(D)$ has elements of order $\le 2$.
As another corollary, the number of elements of $\operatorname{Cl}(D)$ with a given genus is always a power of two.

We now define:

> **Definition 25.** An integer $n \ge 1$ is **convenient** if the following equivalent conditions hold:
>
> - The principal form $x^2+ny^2$ is the only reduced form with the principal genus.
> - $\Phi_D$ is injective (hence an isomorphism).
> - $\left\lvert h(D) \right\rvert = 2^{\mu-1}$.

Thus we arrive at the following corollary:

> **Corollary 26** **(Convenient numbers have nice representations)**
>
> Let $n \ge 1$ be convenient. Then $p$ is of the form $x^2+ny^2$ if and only if
> $p$ lies in the principal genus.

Hence the representability depends only on $p \pmod{4n}$.

OEIS [A000926](https://oeis.org/A000926) lists 65 convenient numbers.
This sequence is known to be complete except for at most one more number;
moreover the list is complete assuming the Grand Riemann Hypothesis.

## 7. Cubic and quartic reciprocity

To treat the cases where $n$ is not convenient, the correct thing to do is develop class field theory.
However, we can still make a little bit more progress if we bring higher reciprocity theorems to bear:
we'll handle the cases $n=27$ and $n=64$, two examples of numbers which are not convenient.

### 7.1. Cubic reciprocity

First, we prove that

> **Theorem 27** **(On $p = x^2+27y^2$)**
>
> <span id="thmxx27yy"></span> A prime $p > 3$ is of the form $x^2+27y^2$ if and
> only if $p \equiv 1 \pmod 3$ and $2$ is a cubic residue modulo $p$.

To do this we use cubic reciprocity,
which requires working in the Eisenstein integers $\mathbb Z[\omega]$ where $\omega$ is a cube root of unity.
There are six units in $\mathbb Z[\omega]$ (the sixth roots of unity),
hence each nonzero number has six **associates** (differing by a unit), and the ring is in fact a PID.

Now if we let $\pi$ be a prime not dividing $3$, and $\alpha$ is coprime to $\pi$,
then we can define the **cubic Legendre symbol** by setting

$$
\left( \frac{\alpha}{\pi} \right)_3 \equiv \alpha^{\frac13(N\pi-1)} \pmod \pi \in \left\{ 1, \omega, \omega^2 \right\}.
$$

Moreover, we can define a **primary** prime $\pi \nmid 3$ to be one such that $\pi \equiv -1 \pmod 3$;
given any prime exactly one of the six associates is primary. We then have the following reciprocity theorem:

> **Theorem 28** **(Cubic reciprocity)**
>
> If $\pi$ and $\theta$ are disjoint primary primes in $\mathbb Z[\omega]$ then
> $$\left( \frac{\pi}{\theta} \right)_3 = \left( \frac{\theta}{\pi} \right)_3.$$
> We also have the following supplementary laws: if $\pi = (3m-1) + 3n\omega$, then
>
> $$
> \left( \frac{\omega}{\pi} \right)_3 = \omega^{m+n} \qquad\text{and}\qquad
> \left( \frac{1-\omega}{\pi} \right)_3 = \omega^{2m}.
> $$

The first supplementary law is for the unit (analogous to $(-1/p)$) while the
second reciprocity law handles the prime divisors of $3 = -\omega^2(1-\omega)^2$ (analogous to $(2/p)$.)

We can tie this back into $\mathbb Z$ as follows.
If $p \equiv 1 \pmod 3$ is a rational prime then it is represented by $x^2+xy+y^2$,
and thus we can put $p = \pi \overline{\pi}$ for some prime $\pi$, $N(\pi) = p$.
Consequently, we have a natural isomorphism
$$\mathbb Z[\omega] / \pi \mathbb Z[\omega] \cong \mathbb Z / p \mathbb Z.$$
Therefore, we see that a given $a \in (\mathbb Z/p\mathbb Z)^\times$ is a cubic
residue if and only if $(\alpha/\pi)_3 = 1$.

In particular, we have the following corollary, which is all we will need:

> **Corollary 29** **(When $2$ is a cubic residue)**
>
> Let $p \equiv 1 \pmod 3$ be a rational prime, $p > 3$. Write $p = \pi \overline{\pi}$ with $\pi$ primary.
> Then $2$ is a cubic residue modulo $p$ if and only if $\pi \equiv 1 \pmod 2$.

_Proof:_ By cubic reciprocity:

$$
\left( \frac{2}{\pi} \right)_3 = \left( \frac{\pi}{2} \right)_3 \equiv
\pi^{\frac13(N2-1)} \equiv \pi \pmod 2.
$$

$\Box$

Now we give the proof of [Theorem 27](#thmxx27yy).

_Proof:_ First assume
$$p = x^2+27y^2 = \left( x+3\sqrt 3 y \right)\left( x-3\sqrt 3 y \right).$$
Let $\pi = x + 3 \sqrt{-3} y = (x+3y) + 6y\omega$ be primary, noting that $\pi \equiv 1 \pmod 2$.
Now clearly $p \equiv 1 \pmod 3$, so done by corollary.

For the converse, assume $p \equiv 1 \pmod 3$,
$p = \pi \overline{\pi}$ with $\pi$ primary and $\pi \equiv 1 \pmod 2$.
If we set $\pi = a + b\omega$ for integers $a$ and $b$,
then the fact that $\pi \equiv 1 \pmod 2$ and $\pi \equiv -1 \pmod 3$ is enough
to imply that $6 \mid b$ (check it!). Moreover,
$$p = a^2-ab+b^2 = \left( a - \frac{1}{2} b \right)^2 + 27 \left( \frac16b \right)^2$$
as desired. $\Box$

### 7.2. Quartic reciprocity

This time we work in $\mathbb Z[i]$, for which there are four units $\pm 1$, $\pm i$.
A prime is **primary** if $\pi \equiv 1 \pmod{2+2i}$;
every prime not dividing $2 = -i(1+i)^2$ has a unique associate which is primary. Then we can as before define

$$
\alpha^{\frac14(N\pi-1)} \equiv \left( \frac{\alpha}{\pi} \right)_4 \pmod{\pi} \in \left\{ \pm 1,
\pm i \right\}
$$

where $\pi$ is primary, and $\alpha$ is nonzero mod $\pi$.
As before $p \equiv 1 \pmod 4$,
$p = \pi\overline{\pi}$ we have that $a$ is a quartic residue modulo $p$ if
and only if $\left( a/\pi \right)_4 = 1$ thanks to the isomorphism
$$\mathbb Z[i] / \pi \mathbb Z[i] \cong \mathbb Z / p \mathbb Z.$$
Now we have

> **Theorem 30** **(Quartic reciprocity)**
>
> If $\pi$ and $\theta$ are distinct primary primes in $\mathbb Z[i]$ then
>
> $$
> \left( \frac{\theta}{\pi} \right)_4 = \left( \frac{\pi}{\theta} \right)_4
> (-1)^{\frac{1}{16}(N\theta-1)(N\pi-1)}.
> $$
>
> We also have supplementary laws that state that if $\pi = a+bi$ is primary, then
>
> $$
> \left( \frac{i}{\pi} \right)_4 = i^{-\frac{1}{2}(a-1)} \qquad\text{and}\qquad
> \left( \frac{1+i}{\pi} \right)_4 = i^{\frac14(a-b-b^2-1)}.
> $$

Again, the first law handles units, and the second law handles the prime divisors of $2$.
The corollary we care about this time in fact uses only the supplemental laws:

> **Corollary 31** **(When $2$ is a quartic residue)**
>
> Let $p \equiv 1 \pmod 4$ be a prime, and put $p = \pi\overline{\pi}$ with $\pi = a+bi$ primary. Then
> $$\left( \frac{2}{\pi} \right)_4 = i^{-b/2}$$
> and in particular $2$ is a quartic residue modulo $p$ if and only if $b \equiv 0 \pmod 8$.

_Proof:_ Note that $2 = i^3(1+i)^2$ and applying the above. Therefore

$$
\left( \frac{2}{\pi} \right)_4 = \left( \frac{i}{\pi} \right)_4^3 \left(
\frac{1+i}{\pi} \right)_4^2 = i^{-\frac32(a-1)} \cdot i^{\frac12(a-b-b^2-1)} =
i^{-(a-1) - \frac{1}{2} b(b+1)}.
$$

Now we assumed $a+bi$ is primary. We claim that
$$a - 1 + \frac{1}{2} b^2 \equiv 0 \pmod 4.$$
Note that since $(a+bi)-1$ was is divisible by $2+2i$, hence $N(2+2i)=8$ divides $(a-1)^2+b^2$. Thus
$$2(a-1) + b^2 \equiv 2(a-1) + (a-1)^2 \equiv (a-1)(a-3) \equiv 0 \pmod 8$$
since $a$ is odd and $b$ is even. Finally,

$$
\left( \frac{2}{\pi} \right)_4 = i^{-(a-1) - \frac{1}{2} b(b+1)} =
i^{-\frac{1}{2} b + (a-1+\frac{1}{2} b^2)} \equiv i^{-\frac{1}{2} b} \pmod p.
$$

$\Box$

From here we quickly deduce

> **Theorem 32** **(On $p = x^2+64y^2$)**
>
> If $p > 2$ is prime, then $p = x^2+64y^2$ if and only if $p \equiv 1 \pmod 4$
> and $2$ is a quartic residue modulo $p$.
