Title: A trailer for p-adic analysis, second half: Mahler coefficients
Date: 2018-10-25 13:37
Tags: analytic number theory, math, p-adic
Slug: p-adic-2
Status: published
original_url: 2018/10/25/a-trailer-for-p-adic-analysis-second-half-mahler-coefficients/

In the previous post we defined $p$-adic numbers.
This post will state (mostly without proof) some more surprising results about
continuous functions $f \colon \mathbb Z_p \rightarrow \mathbb Q_p$.
Then we give the famous proof of the Skolem-Mahler-Lech theorem using $p$-adic analysis.

## 1. Digression on $\mathbb C_p$

Before I go on, I want to mention that $\mathbb Q_p$ is not algebraically closed.
So, we can take its algebraic closure $\overline{\mathbb Q_p}$ --- but this
field is now no longer complete (in the topological sense).
However, we can then take the completion of this space to obtain $\mathbb C_p$.
In general, completing an algebraically closed field remains algebraically closed,
and so there is a larger space $\mathbb C_p$ which is algebraically closed _and_ complete.
This space is called the $p$-adic complex numbers.

We won't need $\mathbb C_p$ at all in what follows, so you can forget everything you just read.

## 2. Mahler coefficients: a description of continuous functions on $\mathbb Z_p$

One of the big surprises of $p$-adic analysis is that we can concretely describe
all continuous functions $\mathbb Z_p \rightarrow \mathbb Q_p$. They are given by a basis of functions
$$\binom xn \overset{\mathrm{def}}{=} \frac{x(x-1) \dots (x-(n-1))}{n!}$$
in the following way.

> **Theorem 1** **(Mahler; see Schikhof Theorem 51.1 and Exercise 51.B)**
>
> Let $f \colon \mathbb Z_p \rightarrow \mathbb Q_p$ be continuous,
> and define <span id="eqmahler"></span>
> $$a_n = \sum_{k=0}^n \binom nk (-1)^{n-k} f(n) \quad (1).$$
> Then $\lim_n a_n = 0$ and
> $$f(x) = \sum_{n \ge 0} a_n \binom xn.$$
> Conversely, if $a_n$ is any sequence converging to zero,
> then $f(x) = \sum_{n \ge 0} a_n \binom xn$
> defines a continuous function satisfying [(1)](#eqmahler).

The $a_i$ are called the _Mahler coefficients_ of $f$.

> **Exercise 2.** Last post we proved that if
> $f \colon \mathbb Z_p \rightarrow \mathbb Q_p$ is continuous and
> $f(n) = (-1)^n$ for every $n \in \mathbb Z_{\ge 0}$ then $p = 2$.
> Re-prove this using Mahler's theorem,
> and this time show conversely that a unique such $f$ exists when $p=2$.

You'll note that these are the same finite differences that one uses on
polynomials in high school math contests, which is why they are also called "Mahler differences".

$$
\begin{aligned}
  a_0 &= f(0) \\
  a_1 &= f(1) - f(0) \\
  a_2 &= f(2) - 2f(1) - f(0) \\
  a_3 &= f(3) - 3f(2) + 3f(1) - f(0).
\end{aligned}
$$

Thus, one can think of $a_n \rightarrow 0$ as saying that
the values of $f(0)$, $f(1)$, … behave like a polynomial modulo $p^e$ for every $e \ge 0$.
Amusingly, this fact was used on a [USA TST in 2011](https://aops.com/community/p2374801):

> **Exercise 3** **(USA TST 2011/3)**
>
> Let $p$ be a prime. We say that a sequence of integers $(z_n)_{n=0}^\infty$
> is a $p$-pod if for each $e \geq 0$, there is an $N \geq 0$ such that whenever $m \geq N$,
> $p^e$ divides the sum
> $$\sum_{k=0}^m (-1)^k \binom mk z_k.$$
> Prove that if both sequences $(x_n)_{n=0}^\infty$ and $(y_n)_{n=0}^\infty$ are $p$-pods,
> then the sequence $(x_n y_n)_{n=0}^\infty$ is a $p$-pod.

## 3. Analytic functions

We say that a function $f \colon \mathbb Z_p \rightarrow \mathbb Q_p$ is
**analytic** if it has a power series expansion
$$\sum_{n \ge 0} c_n x^n \quad c_n \in \mathbb Q_p \qquad\text{ converging for } x \in \mathbb Z_p.$$
As before there is a characterization in terms of the Mahler coefficients:

> **Theorem 4** **(Schikhof Theorem 54.4)**
>
> The function $f(x) = \sum_{n \ge 0} a_n \binom xn$ is analytic if and only if
> $$\lim_{n \rightarrow \infty} \frac{a_n}{n!} = 0.$$

Just as holomorphic functions have finitely many zeros,
we have the following result on analytic functions on $\mathbb Z_p$.

> **Theorem 5** **(Strassmann's theorem)**
>
> Let $f \colon \mathbb Z_p \rightarrow \mathbb Q_p$ be analytic. Then $f$ has finitely many zeros.

## 4. Skolem-Mahler-Lech

We close off with an application of the analyticity results above.

> **Theorem 6** **(Skolem-Mahler-Lech)**

> Let $(x_i)_{i \ge 0}$ be an integral linear recurrence.
> Then the zero set of $x_i$ is eventually periodic.

_Proof:_ According to the theory of linear recurrences, there exists a matrix $A$ such that we can write $x_i$ as a dot product
$$x_i = \left< A^i u, v \right>.$$
Let $p$ be a prime not dividing $\det A$. Let $T$ be an integer such that $A^T \equiv \mathbf{1} \pmod p$.

Fix any $0 \le r < N$. We will prove that either all the terms
$$f(n) = x_{nT+r} \qquad n = 0, 1, \dots$$
are zero, or at most finitely many of them are. This will conclude the proof.

Let $A^T = \mathbf{1} + pB$ for some integer matrix $B$. We have

$$
\begin{aligned}
  f(n)
    &= \left< A^{nT+r} u, v \right>
     = \left< (\mathbf1 + pB)^n A^r u, v \right> \\
    &= \sum_{k \ge 0} \binom nk \cdot p^n \left< B^n A^r u, v \right> \\
    &= \sum_{k \ge 0} a_n \binom nk
       \qquad \text{ where } a_n = p^n \left< B^n A^r u, v \right> \in p^n \mathbb Z.
\end{aligned}
$$

Thus we have written $f$ in Mahler form.
Initially, we define $f \colon \mathbb Z_{\ge 0} \rightarrow \mathbb Z$,
but by Mahler's theorem (since $\lim_n a_n = 0$) it follows that $f$ extends to
a function $f \colon \mathbb Z_p \rightarrow \mathbb Q_p$.
Also, we can check that $\lim_n \frac{a_n}{n!} = 0$ hence $f$ is even analytic.

Thus by Strassman's theorem, $f$ is either identically zero, or else it has finitely many zeros, as desired.
$\Box$
