---
title: An example of a symmetric function with an asymmetric minimum
date: 2026-05-06 13:37
slug: notsymm
tags: announcement, math
status: published
---

For high school math olympiad students,
[OTIS XII applications are out](https://evanchen.cc), due August 1, 2026.

But I'm really going to use that short announcement as an excuse to
describe the _second_ most common error I see on the OTIS application
(the most common error is [this type-error I wrote about in 2023](/type)).
The mistake is so obvious I feel stupid writing about it,
but I keep seeing it.
So I'm going to record it anyway[^link],
even though most of the readers of the blog will laugh at me.

[^link]:
    Free blog advertisement every time I see this mistake again, right?

Here's a problem I made up to demonstrate it:

> **Problem**: For real numbers $a$ and $b$,
> determine the minimum possible value of
> $$f(a,b) = (ab-1)^2 + (a-3)^2 + (b-3)^2.$$

And here's the wrong solution I keep seeing from students.[^llm]

> **Nonsense solution**:
> Because the inequality is symmetric, the minimum must occur when $a=b$.
>
> By (insert some method) the minimum value
> of $(x^2-1)^2 + 2(x-3)^2$ occurs at $x = \sqrt[3]{3}$.
> This gives an answer of
> $$f\left(\sqrt[3]{3}, \sqrt[3]{3}\right) = 19 - 9\sqrt[3]{3} \approx 6.0198.$$

[^llm]:
    In recent years, I've also seen LLM's make the same mistake with
    rage-inducing frequency.
    But this mistake was common before LLM's became popular.

There's a variant of this where the student tries to use calculus
or Lagrange multipliers or whatever first, and thus gets some equations
describing the critical points.[^crit]
Then they assert that because the _equations_ are symmetric,
the solutions to the equations (and hence, the critical points) are symmetric too.

[^crit]:
    In this variant, there's also the issue of critical points ≠ global
    extrema, see [my Lagrange multiplier notes][LM].

[LM]: https://web.evanchen.cc/handouts/LM/LM.pdf

Of course, neither of these symmetry citations is true.[^toomuch]

[^toomuch]:
    And, I feel like there's really an obvious sanity check not passing here.
    If every symmetric inequality really achieved optimums when $a=b=c$,
    wouldn't we just cite this on every such problem?

This was the simplest example I could come up with that provides
a blatant counterexample to the hopeful symmetry claim.
(It was actually surprisingly tricky for me to design a counterexample
that wasn't too complicated and had nice numbers in it.)
The true minimum occurs at $f(1,2) = f(2,1) = 6$.
And yes, there's a short non-calculus proof; see if you can find it.
