Title: DNSCrypt Setup with PDNSD
Date: 2016-11-10 13:37
Tags: linux
Slug: dnscrypt
Status: published
original_url: 2016/11/10/dnscrypt-setup-with-pdnsd/

Here are notes for setting up [DNSCrypt](https://dnscrypt.org/) on Arch Linux,
using [pdnsd](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Pdnsd) as a DNS cache,
assuming the use of [NetworkManager](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/NetworkManager).
I needed it one day since the network I was using blocked traffic to external
DNS servers (parental controls),
and the DNS server provided had an outdated entry for [hmmt.co](https://www.hmmt.co/).
(My dad then pointed out to me I could have just hard-coded the necessary IP address in `/etc/hosts`, oops.)

For the whole process, useful commands to test with are:

- `nslookup hmmt.co` will tell you the IP used and the server from which it came.
- `dig www.hmmt.co` gives much more detailed information to this effect. (From `bind-tools`.)
- `dig @127.0.0.1 www.hmmt.co` lets you query a specific DNS server (in this case 127.0.0.1).
- `drill @127.0.0.1 www.hmmt.co` behaves similarly.

First, `pacman -S pdnsd dnscrypt-proxy` (with `sudo` ostensibly, but I'll leave that out here and henceforth).

Run `systemctl edit dnscrypt-proxy.socket` and fill in `override.conf` with

    [Socket]
    ListenStream=
    ListenDatagram=
    ListenStream=127.0.0.1:40
    ListenDatagram=127.0.0.1:40

Optionally, one can also specify which server which DNS serve to use with
`systemctl edit dnscrypt-proxy.service`. For example for cs-uswest I write

    [Service]
    ExecStart=
    ExecStart=/usr/bin/dnscrypt-proxy
         -R cs-uswest

The empty `ExecStart=` is necessary,
since otherwise `systemctl` will complain about multiple ExecStart commands.

This thus configures `dnscrypt-proxy` to listen on 127.0.0.1, port 40.

Now we configure `pdnsd` to listen on port 53 (default) for cache,
and relay cache misses to `dnscrypt-proxy`. This is accomplished by using the following for `/etc/pdnsd.conf`:

    global {
        perm_cache = 1024;
        cache_dir = "/var/cache/pdnsd";
        run_as = "pdnsd";
        server_ip = 127.0.0.1;
        status_ctl = on;
        query_method = udp_tcp;
        min_ttl = 15m;       # Retain cached entries at least 15 minutes.
        max_ttl = 1w;        # One week.
        timeout = 10;        # Global timeout option (10 seconds).
        neg_domain_pol = on;
        udpbufsize = 1024;   # Upper limit on the size of UDP messages.
    }

    server {
        label = "dnscrypt-proxy";
        ip = 127.0.0.1;
        port = 40;
        timeout = 4;
        proxy_only = on;
    }

    source {
        owner = localhost;
        file = "/etc/hosts";
    }

Now it remains to change the DNS server from whatever default is used into 127.0.0.1.
For NetworkManager users, it is necessary to edit
`/etc/NetworkManager/NetworkManager.conf` to prevent it from overriding this file:

    [main]
    ...
    dns=none

This will cause `resolv.conf` to be written as an empty file by NetworkManager: in this case,
the default 127.0.0.1 is used as the nameserver, which is what we want.

Needless to say, one finishes with

    systemctl enable dnscrypt-proxy
    systemctl start dnscrypt-proxy
    systemctl enable pdnsd
    systemctl start pdnsd
