Title: SysRq on Arch Linux Mac Mini
Date: 2016-12-14 13:37
Tags: linux
Slug: sysrq
Status: published
original_url: 2016/12/14/sysrq-on-arch-linux-mac-mini/

This post documents my adventures of getting the SysRQ key working on my Mac
Mini and Macbook (both running Arch Linux).
The suggestions of `loadkeys` and `keyfuzz` that are the first search entries don't work for me,
so some more sophisticated black magic was necessary.

## Remapping the Fn keys

This step is technically optional, but I did it because the function keys are a pain anyways.
Normally on Apple keyboards one needs to use the `Fn` key to get the normal Fn
keys to behave as a `F<n>` keystroke.
I prefer to reverse this behavior, so that the SysRq combinations is `Alt+F13+F` rather than `Fn+Alt+F13+F`,
say.

For this, the advice on the [Arch Wiki](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Apple_Keyboard#Function_keys_do_not_work) worked,
although it is not thorough on some points that I think should've been said.
On newer kernels, one does this by creating the file `/etc/modprobe.d/hid_apple.conf` and writing

    options hid_apple fnmode=2

Then I edited the file `/etc/mkinitcpio.conf` to include the new file:

    ...
    BINARIES=""

    # FILES
    # This setting is similar to BINARIES above, however, files are added
    # as-is and are not parsed in any way.  This is useful for config files.
    FILES="/etc/modprobe.d/hid_apple.conf"

    # HOOKS
    ...

Finally, recompile the kernel for this change to take effect.
On Arch Linux one can just do this by issuing the command

    $ sudo pacman -S linux

which will reinstall the entire kernel.

## Obtaining the keystroke

Next, I needed to get the scancode of the key I wanted to turn into the SysRQ key.
For me attempting `showkey -s` did not work so I instead had to use evtest,
as described in [this Arch Wiki](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Map_scancodes_to_keycodes).

    $ sudo pacman -S evtest
    $ sudo evtest
    No device specified, trying to scan all of /dev/input/event*
    Available devices:
    /dev/input/event0:  Logitech USB Receiver
    /dev/input/event1:  Logitech USB Receiver
    /dev/input/event2:  Apple, Inc Apple Keyboard
    /dev/input/event3:  Apple, Inc Apple Keyboard
    /dev/input/event4:  Apple Computer, Inc. IR Receiver
    /dev/input/event5:  HDA NVidia Headphone
    /dev/input/event6:  HDA NVidia HDMI/DP,pcm=3
    /dev/input/event7:  Power Button
    /dev/input/event8:  Sleep Button
    /dev/input/event9:  Power Button
    /dev/input/event10: Video Bus
    /dev/input/event11: PC Speaker
    /dev/input/event12: HDA NVidia HDMI/DP,pcm=7
    /dev/input/event13: HDA NVidia HDMI/DP,pcm=8
    Select the device event number [0-13]: 2
    Input driver version is 1.0.1
    Input device ID: bus 0x3 vendor 0x5ac product 0x220 version 0x111
    Input device name: "Apple, Inc Apple Keyboard"

This is on my Mac Mini; the list of devices looks different on my laptop.
After this pressing the desired key yields something which looked like

    Event: time 1456870457.844237, -------------- SYN_REPORT ------------
    Event: time 1456870457.924097, type 4 (EV_MSC), code 4 (MSC_SCAN), value 70068
    Event: time 1456870457.924097, type 1 (EV_KEY), code 183 (KEY_F13), value 1

This is the F13 key which I want to map into a SysRq --- the keycode 70068 above
(which is in fact a hex code) is the one I wanted.

## Using udev

Now that I had the scancode, I cd'ed to `/etc/udev/hwdb.d` and added a file
`90-keyboard-sysrq.hwdb` with the content

    evdev:input:b0003*
      KEYBOARD_KEY_70068=sysrq

One then updates `hwdb.bin` by running the command

    $ sudo udevadm hwdb --update
    $ sudo udevadm trigger

The latter command makes the changes take effect immediately.
You should be able to test this by running `sudo evtest` again;
`evtest` should now report the new keycode (but the same scancode).

One can test the SysRQ key by running Alt+SysRq+H,
and then checking the `dmesg` output to see if anything happened:

    $ dmesg | tail -n 1
    [  283.001240] sysrq: SysRq : HELP : loglevel(0-9) reboot(b) crash(c) ...

## Enable SysRq

It remains to actually enable SysRQ,
according to the [bitmask described here](https://www.kernel.org/doc/Documentation/sysrq.txt).
My system default was apparently 16:

    $ sysctl kernel.sysrq
    kernel.sysrq = 16

For my purposes, I then edited `/etc/sysctl.d/99-sysctl.conf` and added the line

    kernel.sysrq=254

This gave me everything except the nicing of real-time tasks.
Of course the choice of value here is just personal preference.

Personally, my main use for this is killing Chromium,
which has a bad habit of freezing up my computer (especially if Firefox is open too).
I remedy the situation by repeatedly running Alt+SysRq+F to kill off the memory hogs.
If this doesn't work, just Alt+SysRq+K kills off all the processes in the current TTY.
