---
title: USA Special Team Selection Test Series for IMO 2021
date: 2020-11-10 13:37
slug: tst-2021
tags: announcement, olympiad
original_url: 2020/11/10/usa-special-team-selection-test-series-for-imo-2021/
status: published
---

A lot of people have been asking me how team selection is going to work for the USA this year.
This information was sent out to the contestants a while ago,
but I understand that there's a lot of people outside of MOP 2020
who are interested in seeing the TST problems :)
so this is a quick overview of how things are going down this year.

This year there are six tests leading to the IMO 2021 team:

- USA TSTST Day 1: November 12, 2020 (3 problems, 4.5 hours)
- USA TSTST Day 2: December 10, 2020 (3 problems, 4.5 hours)
- USA TSTST Day 3: January 21, 2021 (3 problems, 4.5 hours)
- RMM Day 1: February 2021 (3 problems, 4.5 hours)
- APMO: March 2021 (5 problems, 4 hours)
- USAMO: April 2021 (2 days, each with 3 problems and 4.5 hours)

Everyone who was at the virtual MOP in June 2020
is invited to all three days of TSTST,
and then the top scores get to take the latter three exams
as team selection tests for the
MO. Meanwhile, the RMM teams and EGMO teams are based
on just the three days of TSTST.

Similar to past years, discussion of TSTST is allowed on
noon Eastern time Monday after each day.
That means you can look forward to the first set of three new problems
coming out on Monday, November 16, and similarly for the other two days of TSTST.

To add to the hype, I'll be doing a short one-hour-or-less
[Twitch stream](https://twitch.tv/vEnhance) at 8:00pm ET on Tuesday November 17
where I present the solutions to the TSTST problems of day 1.
If there's demand, I'll probably run a review session
for the other two days of TSTST, as well.

EDIT: Changed stream time to Tuesday so more people have time to try the problems.
