Title: OTIS X applications are open
Date: 2024-05-06 13:37
Slug: otis-x
Status: published
Tags: announcement
original_url: 2024/05/06/otis-x-applications-are-open/

The tenth year of OTIS is now accepting applications.

Due August 1, 2024 for regular deadline and April 30, 2025 for late applications.

<https://web.evanchen.cc/otis.html#apply>

The application and syllabus are pretty much going to be the same as in previous years;
here are some of the (mostly small) changes:

- I deleted the question that used to ask about past contest results because I
  never read the answers to it anyway.
- The application problem set is one geometry problem shorter.
- Problem C.1 had its description change from "Learn to code" to "Learn to code, please,
  I implore you" to encourage more people to [not skip the
  problem](https://blog.evanchen.cc/2023/08/09/agency/).
- Reading Comprehension answers are now all nonnegative integers who sum is six
  times a prime to make it harder for people to get the answers wrong when they submit a late application.
  (For on-time application, the Google Form actually won't even let you submit
  until you get all three answers right.
  But I was consistently shocked at how many people managed to get wrong answers
  to the reading comprehension in the late application.)
- The syllabus now declares that "otter" is preferred over "OTIS-er". 🦦
- Experiment announcement: starting from OTIS X,
  there will be a few reading units related to the undergraduate math syllabus rather than contest math.
  The goal for this would be to reduce the activation energy needed to get
  people to read through parts of Napkin or other textbooks (by baking it into
  the OTIS system that kids are already using) while not causing any visible
  changes to people who aren't interested (because they can just ignore the new units and do other stuff).
  I haven't decided exactly how I want these units to look, but if you have opinions you'd like throw at me,
  feel free to discuss in the comments section.
