---
title: American Masters in Mathematics 2026
date: 2026-03-04 13:37
slug: amm-2026
tags: announcement
original_url: 2026/03/04/amm-2026/
status: published
---

Some of you have probably noticed that I'm helping with
[organizing a new contest](https://www.omegausa.org/)
and are asking what exactly this is.
So far, I haven't said much about it because so much is up-in-the-air
(and that's still true).

However, with the first few acceptances and registrations coming out,
I'm going to post an FAQ and few quick thoughts of my own.
Just to be clear, everything here is my own personal commentary and views
and not those of my employer or OMEGA generally.

## What is OMEGA?

OMEGA (Organization for Math Engagement and Growth in America)
is a new 501(c)(3) whose ambitious long-term goal
is to build great, robust math programs for thousands of students
all across the USA (whether competition-like or not).

However, that is a pipe dream, because OMEGA is also about four months old
and has a whopping four staff, many of which are part-time
(I'm officially only working 1/3-time).
Maybe OMEGA will be a big deal one day, but it certainly isn't right now.
My way of working has always been following [Linus Torvalds' advice][linus]:

> Nobody should start to undertake a large project.
> You start with a small _trivial_ project,
> and you should never expect it to get large.
> … So start small, and think about the details.
> Don't think about some big picture and fancy design.
> If it doesn't solve some fairly immediate need,
> it's almost certainly over-designed.

That brings us to the next FAQ:

[linus]: http://web.archive.org/web/20050404020308/http://www.linuxtimes.net/modules.php?name=News&file=article&sid=145

## What is AMM?

The American Masters in Mathematics is that smallest
reasonable project we could start with.
It will be the first event we run from May 22 to 25, 2026 in Denver this year.

The competition itself will be fairly standard.
It'll be a proof-based, 4.5-hour, 5-problem event with each problem worth 7 points.
We officially have a [syllabus][syllabus] if you are interested,
but at least for 2026 there won't be any huge shockers here for
any of you that have done math olympiad content before.
The easiest problems are intended to be similar to what you see on
the middle of [BAMO-12][bamo]; the hardest ones will be medium-hard IMO level.

But in addition to the contest itself (4.5 hours),
there will be quite a lot of time for some fun events.
Officially, the branding is "competition and festival".
In the program, the competition lasts 4.5 hours
but the festival is something like 15 to 20 hours.

[syllabus]: https://drive.google.com/file/d/16U_4uLLG2tU8etVZOm4eLlv17S4dQdDC/view
[bamo]: https://www.bamo.org/

## What makes AMM different?

When I pitched the idea of AMM,
the basic thesis was that we should run a legit in-person proof-based event,
because those are pretty rare in the USA.

To me, I think what should make AMM attractive and fill some immediate need
is some combination of the following:

- You write proofs and human reviewers will read what you wrote.
  It's not yet another computational contest where you get graded based
  on just a number, so we can write better, more interesting problems.

- You'll even get a chance to talk with the reviewers briefly.
  I don't want to brand this as IMO coordination,
  because it's definitely not that (in particular, we don't want to be adversarial).
  There are _so many_ things TBD about how this is going to look.
  However, the basic premise is we'd like everyone who comes to be able
  to spend a few minutes getting live feedback from a mathematician
  about at least one of their submitted solutions.

- It's in-person. You'll get to hang out with people,
  unlike [USEMO](https://web.evanchen.cc/usemo.html).
  I think you're missing out on a lot if your only interactions
  with like-minded peers is on Discord.

- I don't know how to say this politely,
  but I think it's ridiculous to tell a high school student
  "you can only write a proof once you get 13+ on the [AIME](https://w.wiki/J5vF)".
  Like, hello?
  Anyway, if you're sad about not getting to take USAMO this year, come to Denver.
  Our problems will also be cool.

- I _will_ make sure there is a puzzle hunt on Sunday.
  It might be a tiny mini-hunt with three puzzles and a metapuzzle
  (think [Zelda hunt](https://deusovi.github.io/puzzlefiles/zelda-minihunt.pdf)),
  or it might be a bit bigger, but there will be _something_.

## Why is there a long and annoying application?

Mostly because we have no idea how we're going to select people
if we end up getting more applications than capacity
(we all know AMC/AIME scores are almost worthless now).
So we're asking for a lot of information because we don't even know
what we're looking for yet.

Please bear with us. It's our first time too.

## There's higher math on the syllabus!?

That's not a question, but yes, I did put it there.
I understand this might be a bit controversial.
But broadly speaking I want to push people to not be so confined
with respect to whatever the unspoken "IMO syllabus" is.
As I said in a [forum post a few years back](https://aops.com/community/p22794121):

> Certainly, there needs to be some informal boundary on exam content,
> so that the IMO does not degenerate into a trivia contest.
> However, on the other extreme, I should hope that the world's best math students
> are not so inflexible that merely mentioning concavity makes them cower in fear.
> _Change breaks the brittle._

I just think we should encourage people to learn more math.
The choice of "basic algebra and analysis" is intentional
because that's the narrow bottleneck between high-school math
and the modern undergraduate syllabus.

I know there's such a thing as going too far.
Affine schemes appearing in high-school problem statements
is unreasonable, for example.
But I don't think some first-year algebra and analysis is going too far.
So many more doors are open if you know a bit of abstract and linear algebra
and real analysis.
So I think the [ROI](https://w.wiki/Fc4M) is well-justified.

## Are you planning to replace the MAA AMC?

I mean, that's sure a tempting idea, but that's not even on my radar right now.
Again: start with a small trivial project, and never expect it to get large.

The AMM is just an event having its first year.
I honestly _already_ think the scope of AMM 2026 is too big
and it's stressing me out.

## Where did the name come from?

During some meeting early on, I said something like
"we can run our own version of the [RMM][rmm], like the American Masters in
Mathematics or whatever" and the name never changed after that.

[rmm]: https://w.wiki/J5vA

## How do I apply?

Go to the [website](https://www.omegausa.org/#pTop)
and fill out the seven pages of Google Forms.
