---
title: ___ students have to suffer
date: 2016-05-27 13:37
slug: blank
tags: politics
original_url: 2016/05/27/fill-in-the-blank
status: published
---

This will be old news to most of the readership of this blog,
but I realize I've never written it down, so time to fix that.

## Fill in the blank

Let's begin by playing a game of "fill in the blank".
Suppose that today, the director of secondary education at your high school says:

> "\_\_\_ students just have to suffer."

This is not a pleasant sentence. Fill in that blank with a *gender*, and you'd be fired tomorrow morning.
Fill in that blank with an *ethnic group*, and you'd be fired in an hour.
Fill in that blank with "special needs", and you'd be be sued.
Heck, forget "\_\_\_ students", replace that with "You".
Can you see someone's career flashing before their eyes?
How could you possibly get away with saying that about any group of students?

## Those 500 hours

> "Smart students just have to suffer." <br />
> --- Director of Secondary Education at Fremont Unified School District

This happened to me.

When I was a senior in high school,
I was enrolled in two classes and would thereafter run off to take graduate math at UC Berkeley.
([Notes here](http://www.mit.edu/~evanchen/coursework.html).) This was fantastic and worked for a few weeks,
so I got to learn real analysis and algebraic combinatorics from some nice professors.

Then the school district found out, and called me in for a meeting.
The big guy shows up, and gives me this golden quote.
I was then required to enroll in five classes a day,
the minimum number of classes required for me to count towards the average daily
attendance funding for my school district.

And that is why, for three periods a day, five days a week, I was forced to sit in the front office,
saying "Hi, how may I help you?".

(I didn't even get paid! Could've asked for a cut of that ADA funding.
It didn't all go to waste though;
I spent the time [writing a book](http://www.mit.edu/~evanchen/geombook.html).)

## Everywhere Else

Since I've had fun picking on my school district, I will now pick on the Department of Education.

> "While challenging and improving the mathematical problem-solving skills of
> high-performing students are surely every-day objectives of those who teach such students,
> it is not a problem, relatively speaking, of major import in American education."<br />
> --- [Department of Education Reviewer](http://artofproblemsolving.com/community/c864h980625)

The point is that the problem of neglecting gifted students isn't at the level of individual teachers.
It's not a problem at the level of individual schools, or individual cities.
This is a problem with *national culture*.
The problem is that *as a culture* we think it's okay to say a sentence like that.

Replace "high-performing" with *any adjective you want*.
Any gender, any social class, any ethnic group, *whatever*, and you will get a backlash.
But we've decided that it's okay to mistreat the gifted students, because no one complains at that.

(A lot of people have misinterpreted
this section into a suggestion we should spend resources on top students.
I think that claim is too strong and I'm not going to take a stance on it here.
But the claim "we should not spend resources to intentionally harm
top students with no benefit to anyone else" should be less controversial.)

## Next Actions

So what can you do to change the national culture? As far as I can tell, this is mostly a lost clause.
I wouldn't bother trying.

The reason I wrote this post because I went through most of high school not
really being aware of just how badly I was being mistreated.
It's actually really not normal for your school's director of education
to personally interfere with your education for nobody's benefit.[^ada]

[^ada]:
    Maybe you could argue that the ADA funding was helping the school.
    However, I'm confident if I had offered to just pay out of pocket
    twice the amount of money the school was losing from my absence,
    they still would have said no.

What you *can* do (and should) is make small local changes.
You can persuade individual schools to make exceptions for a kid,
and frequently individual teachers will do what they can to help a gifted student as well.

Ask a lot of people: if one administrator says no, ignore them and ask another one.
Be prepared to hear "no" a lot, but keep waiting for the one or two crucial "yes" moments.
If push comes to shove, switch schools, etc. Take the effort to get this one right.
(See [56:30-60:00 of this for more on
that](http://techtv.mit.edu/videos/30866-math-prize-for-girls-presentation-by-richard-rusczyk).)

Dear past self, yell a little harder at the big guy when he comes,
maybe you can save yourself 500 hours as an office aid.
