---
title: Everything I need is on the ground
date: 2023-03-11 13:37
slug: ground
tags: math, phd
original_url: 2023/03/11/everything-i-need-is-on-the-ground/
status: published
---

For me the biggest difference between undergraduate math and PhD life
has been something I've never seen anyone else talk about:
it's the feeling like I could no longer see the ground.

To explain what this means, imagine that mathematics is this wide tower,
where you start with certain axioms as a foundation,
and then you build upwards on it.
At first learning math felt like slowly climbing up this tower.
When I reached a landmark, it felt like I was on the balcony
of the 30th or 50th or 100th floor, enjoying the view,
with an appreciation of the floors I had ascended to get here.

In theory, proofs in math can be formalized as a
long sequence of logical steps from the axioms that could be
[computer-verified](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Proof_assistant).
This turns out to way too cumbersome to actually do _in practice_ given
the current state of technology (though [this is changing][flt]),
but I was at least satisfied that all the results I had seen
_could in principle_ be compiled to a formal proof.

As soon as I started doing my PhD,
this feeling of internal consistency and safety completely vanished.
It felt like someone had put me a rocket
and boosted me to the 100,000th floor.
I had no vision of the ground or any of the floors below me.
I could actually be on Neptune for all I know.

It was scary enough having "black boxes" (quoting a theorem
without having gone through the proof yourself).
At this point, I don't even know the _definitions_ of half
the objects that I'm playing with.
It's like, I'm trying to prove a result about an
irreducible tempered cuspidal automorphic representation $\pi$,
except I don't know what any of the five words before $\pi$ means.
So I just take someone's word for it that the only thing I need
for this calculation are the $n$ Satake parameters
$\alpha_1, \dots, \alpha_n \in \mathbb{C}$ attached to $\pi$,
except I don't know what a Satake parameter is either,
but at least I know it's a complex number, so yay?

I will tell you a sobering story about my 2016 paper
[arXiv:1608.04146](https://arxiv.org/abs/1608.04146).
I was really nervous when writing it because the arithmetic geometry
involved was _well_ above my pay-grade, and even asked
a more knowledgeable colleague to sanity-check it before submission.
When it reached the journal, one referee said it looked good
modulo six minor typos (like "we map pick" to "we may pick");
the second referee never replied.

Then just as the paper was about to be published,
the second referee suddenly replied with a document saying the paper
"need[s] a deep revision to fix the proof of the main result
and to improve the exposition which up to now is not accurate",
followed by a 3-page list of ambiguities and errors.
My original paper was only 10 pages!
I was extremely grateful to the second referee.
(And no slight to the first referee; math is hard,
and the point of peer review is sanity-checking, not deep verification.)

I guess I'm scared of heights.
I wonder if I'm supposed to just get used to it.

[flt]: https://www.cs.rug.nl/~wim/fermat/wilesEnglish.html
