Title: A story of a town
Date: 2023-10-23 13:37
Tags: learning, teaching
Slug: town
Status: published
original_url: 2023/10/23/a-story-of-a-town/

_This was originally a diary entry, but I showed it to some students
who told me I should put it in my blog instead._

Imagine you've moved to a new town, and want to explore the local offerings,
because there's a lot to do and see, and you're expecting to live here a while.

The first few days, it's really overwhelming. Everything is unfamiliar. You get
lost just trying to buy groceries. You constantly have to consult maps to get
anywhere. It takes a while to adjust.

But after the first week, you notice you don't need a map as much. You can walk
to the grocery store yourself; you remember which turn to take each crossing.
You know the names of the biggest streets and a few landmarks, and you can get
around with familiar roads as anchors. Though you've only been inside a small
fraction of the buildings, you already have a sense of the city layout.

And perhaps most importantly, you find you already have an idea where to visit
next. Like that quaint old-fashioned bookstore you pass by every morning on the
way to coffee that you thought looked really neat, and you just know you have to
come by some Sunday afternoon. Or the park with the fountain in it by the bus
stop that'd be a great picnic location. Or the opera house you keep hearing
about. You know these things instinctively because you've actually started
walking the streets and seeing the store windows and feeling the air, things no
paper map could have told you in advance.

... This is all a metaphor for why I feel so strange when people ask me for an
ordered list of books for math olympiads. Yes, you might feel lost at the
beginning, or need a lot of GPS assistance at first. But this town is smaller
than you might think. Even if you're new, it's a mistake to worry about Google
Maps vs Apple Maps[^maps], or whether to trust Yelp. Your priority is to get
oriented enough that you can explore yourself.

[^maps]:
    Although I heard Google Maps just
    [doesn't work in South Korea](https://timzertravels.com/why-doesnt-google-maps-work-in-south-korea/)?
