Title: On Problem Sets
Date: 2015-05-07 13:37
Tags:
Slug: pset
Status: published
original_url: 2015/05/07/238/

(It appears to be May 7 -- good luck to all the national MathCounts competitors tomorrow!)

## 1. An 8.044 Problem

Recently I saw a [8.044 physics](http://ocw.mit.edu/courses/physics/8-044-statistical-physics-i-spring-2013/) problem
set which contained the problem

> Consider a system of $N$ almost independent harmonic oscillators whose energy
> in a microcanonical ensemble is given by $E = \frac 12 \hbar \omega N + \hbar \omega M$.
> Show that this energy can be obtained is $\frac{(M+N-1)!}{M!(N-1)!}$.

Once you remove the physics fluff, it immediately reduces to

> Show the number of nonnegative integer solutions to $M = \sum_{i=1}^N n_i$
> is $\frac{(M+N-1)!}{M!(N-1)!}$.

And as anyone who has done lots of math contests knows,
this is the famous [stars and bars](<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stars_and_bars_(combinatorics)>) problem (also
known as balls and urns).

This made me really upset when I saw it, for two reasons.
One, the main difficulty of the question isn't related to the physics at hand at all.
Once you plug in the definition you get a fairly elegant combinatorics problem, not a physics problem.
And secondly, although the solution to the (unrelated) combinatorics is nice, it's very _tricky_.
I don't think I could have come up with it easily if I hadn't seen it before.
Either you've seen the stars-and-bars trick before and the problem is trivial, or you haven't seen the trick,
and you could easily spend a couple hours trying to come up with a solution --
and none of that two hours is teaching you any physics.

You can see why a physics instructor might give this as a homework problem.
The solution is short and elementary, something that a undergraduate student could understand and write down.
But somewhere at MIT, some poor non-mathematician just spent a good chunk of
their evening struggling with this one-trick classic and probably not learning much from it.

## 2. Don't I Like Hard Problems?

Well, "not learning much from it" is not entirely accurate…

Something that bothered me (and which I hope also bothers the reader) was I
complained that the problem was "tricky".
That seems off, because as you might already know, I like hard problems; in fact,
in high school I was well despised for helping teachers find hard extra credit problems to pose.
("Hard" isn't _quite_ the same as "tricky", but that's a different direction altogether.) After all,
hard problems from math contests taught me to think, isn't that right?

Well, maybe what's wrong is that there's no physics in the hard part of the problem;
the bonus problems I provided for my teachers were all closely tied to the material at hand.
But that doesn't seem right either.
Euclidean geometry might be useless outside of high school,
but nonetheless all the time I spent developing barycentric coordinates still made me a smarter person.
Similarly, Richard Rusczyk will often tell you that geometry problems trained
him for running the business that is now the Art of Problem Solving.
For exactly the same reason, thinking about the stars and bars problem is certainly good for the mind,
isn't that right? Why was I upset about it?

Well, I still hold my objection that there's no physics in the problem. Why?
So at this point we're naturally led to ask: what was the point of the problem set in the first place?
And that answer this, you have to ask: what was the point of the _class_ in the first place?

On paper, it's to learn physics. Is that really all?
Maybe the professor thinks it's important to teach students how to think as well. Does she?
And the answer here is I really don't know, because I have no idea who's teaching the class.
So I'll instead ask the more idealistic question: _should_ she?

And surprisingly, I think the answer can be very different from place to place.

On one extreme, I think high school math should be _mainly_ about teaching students to think.
Virtually none of the students will actually use the specific content being taught in the class.
Why does the average high school student need to know what $\int_{[0,1]} x^2 dx$ is?
They don't, and that shouldn't be the point of the class;
not the least of reasons being that in ten years half of them won't even remember what $\int$ means anymore.

But on the other extreme, if you have a math major trying to learn the
undergraduate curriculum the picture can change entirely, just because there is so much math to cover.
It's kind of ridiculous, honestly: take the average incoming freshman and the average senior math major,
and the latter will know so much more than the former.
So in this case I would be much more worried about the content of the course;
assuming for example that I'm hoping to be a math major,
the chance that the (main ideas of) the specific content will be useful later on is far higher.

This is especially true for, say, students who did math contests extensively in high school,
because that ability to solve hard problems is already there;
it's not an interesting use of time to be slowly doing challenging exercises in
group theory when there's still modules, rings, fields, categories, algebraic geometry, homological algebra,
all untouched (to say nothing of analysis).

What this boils down to is trying to distinguish between the actual content of
the given class (something very local) versus the more general skill of problem-solving or thinking.
In high school I focused almost exclusively on the latter;
as time passes I've been shifting my focus farther and farther to the former.

## 3. $\text{A} \ge 90\%$

Now suppose that we _are_ interested in teaching how to think on these problem sets.
There's one other difference between the problem sets and math contests.
You're expected to finish your problem sets and you're not expected to finish math contests.

I want to complain that there seems to be a stigma that you _have_ to do
exercises in order to learn math or physics or whatever,
and that people who give up on them are somehow lazy or something.
It _is_ true in some sense that you can only learn math by doing.
It _is_ probably true that thinking about a hard problem will teach you something.
What is _not_ true is that you should always stare at a problem until either it or you cracks.

This is obviously true in math contests too.
One of the things I was really bad at was giving up on a problem after hours of no progress.
In some sense the time limit of contests is kind of nice;
it cuts you off from spending too long on any one problem.
You can't be expected to be _able_ to solve all hard problems, or else they're not hard.

Problem sets fare much more poorly in this respect.
The benefit of thinking about the hard problem diminishes over time (e.g.
a typical exercise can teach you more in the first hour than it does in the next
six) and sometimes you're just totally dead in the water after a couple hours of staring.
The big guy seem to implicitly tell you that you should keep working because it's supposed to be hard.
Is that really true? It certainly wasn't true in the math contest world,
so I don't see any reason why it's true here.

In other words, I don't think our poor physics student would have lost much by
giving up on balls and urns after a few hours.
And really, for all the warnings that looking up problems online is immoral,
is asking your friend to help really that different?
