Title: Yet another reason I don't give much generic advice
Date: 2023-10-03 13:37
Tags: advice, teaching
Slug: generic
Status: published
original_url: 2023/10/03/yet-another-reason-i-dont-give-much-generic-advice/

So I have an FAQ now for contest-studying advice, but there's a "frequently used
answer" that I want to document now that doesn't fit in the FAQ format because
the question looks different to everyone that asks it.

The questions generally have the same shape: "would it be better to do X or Y
when studying?". Like:

- Is it better to use GeoGebra when practicing geometry?
- Should I work on some new OTIS units or go back through some old ones that I
  didn't finish?
- Should I work on hard problems in my strongest subject or medium problems in
  my weaker subjects?
- Would it be better if I learned this or that first?

and things like this.

And the answer is, for a lot of pairs (X,Y), if you're so unsure that you're
asking me about it, then you should just do whatever you feel like. And there
are three big reasons why.

1.  **I probably don't know the answer in general**. If you wanted to know the
    answer to any of these questions with any reasonable confidence, you'd like
    to do something resembling a controlled study, where you randomly group a
    bunch of students into two categories and look for a statistically
    significant effect. Suffice to say, that hasn't happened.

2.  **I probably don't know the answer for you, even if I did know the answer in
    general.** You need to realize that you are the world expert in you.

    It reminded me of this really cringey question that some parent asked once:
    "I read this study that girls learn on a different curve, and they need to
    learn the same amount of material before so-and-so, therefore to succeed
    they need to build a foundation two years ahead of boys...".
    To which I wanted to reply[^1], "statistics don't matter for N = 1".
    Unless you happen to have, say, 10000 children and don't have the time to
    get to know them all individually, then even correct information about
    statistically significant effects can still be totally useless.

3.  **Most importantly: energy management dominates everything else**.
    This is the big one.

    There's a common failure mode where if I say "X is maybe better than Y", then
    people feel like they have to do X rather than Y, even though they’d rather
    do Y in a vacuum. And then they end up doing a small amount of X rather than
    a large amount of Y, leading to a net loss.

    That's why unless I feel Y is truly much worse than X, I usually prefer to
    remain neutral.

[^1]:
    But I was an audience member, so instead I just watched as the speakers
    were visibly trying not to laugh.
